The time is not long past when the copulative in that title might have
suggested to some minds an antithesis,--as acid and alkali, or heat
and cold. That religion could have affiliation with anything
so worldly as poetry would have seemed to some pious people a
questionable proposition. There were the Psalms, in the Old Testament,
to be sure; and the minister had been heard to allude to them as
poetry: might not that indicate some heretical taint in him, caught,
perchance, from the "German neologists" whose influence we were
beginning to dread? It did not seem quite orthodox to describe the
Psalms as poems; and when, a little later, some one ventured to speak
of the Book of Job as a _dramatic_ poem, there were many who were
simply horrified. Indeed, it was difficult for many good people
to consider the Biblical writings as in any sense literature; they
belonged in a category by themselves, and the application to them
of the terms by which we describe similar writings in other books
appeared to many good men and women a kind of profanation. This was
not, of course, the attitude of educated men and women, but something
akin to it affected large numbers of excellent people.

We are well past that period, and the relations of religion and
poetry may now be discussed with no fear of misunderstandings. These
relations are close and vital. Poetry is indebted to religion for its
largest and loftiest inspirations, and religion is indebted to poetry
for its subtlest and most luminous interpretations.

Religion is related to poetry as life is related to art. Religion is
life, the life of God in the soul of man--the response of man's spirit
to the attractions of the divine Spirit. Poetry is an interpretation
of life. Religious poetry endeavors to express, in beautiful
forms, the facts of the religious life. There is poetry that is not
religious; poetry which deals only with that which is purely sensuous,
poetry which does not hint at spiritual facts, or divine relations;
and there is religion which has but little to do with poetry: but the
highest religious thoughts and feelings are greatly served by putting
them into poetic forms; and the greatest poetry is always that which
sets forth the facts of the religious life. "Without love to man and
love to God," says Dr. Strong, "the greatest poetry is impossible.
Mere human love to God is not enough to stir the deepest chords either
in the poet or in his readers. It is the connection of human love with
the divine love that gives it permanence and security."[A]

If, then, religion is the supreme experience of the human spirit, and
that experience finds its most perfect literary expression in poetry,
the present volume ought to contain a precious collection of the best
literature. And any one who wished to give to a friend a volume which
would convey to him the essential elements of religion would probably
be safe to choose this volume rather than any prose treatise upon
theology ever printed. He who reads this book through will get
a clearer and truer idea of what the religious life is than any
philosophical discussion could give him. For this poetry is an attempt
to express life, not to explain it. It offers pictures or reports
rather than analyses of religious experience. It gives utterance
to the real life of religion in the individual soul, and is not a
generalization of religious thoughts and feelings.

The sources from which this collection has been drawn are abundant
and varied. The psalmody and hymnology of the church furnish a vast
preserve, the exploration of which would be a large undertaking. It
must be confessed that the pious people who had in their hands some
of the ancient hymn-books were justified in feeling that religion and
poetry were not closely related, for many of the hymns they were
wont to sing were guiltless of any poetic character. It was too often
evident that the hymn-writer had been more intent on giving metrical
form to proper theological concepts than on giving utterance to his
own religious life. But the feeling has been growing that in hymns, at
any rate, life is more than dogma; and we have now some collections of
hymns that come pretty near being books of poetry. The improvement in
this department of literature within the past twenty-five years has
been marked. There is still, indeed, in many hymnals, and especially
in hymnals for Sunday schools and social meetings, much doggerel; but
large recent contributions of hymns which are true poetry, many of the
best of them from American sources, have made it possible to furnish
our congregations with admirable manuals of praise.

The indebtedness of religion to poetry which is thus expressed in
the hymnology of the church is very large. Probably many of us
are indebted for definite and permanent religious conceptions and
impressions quite as much to felicitous phrases of hymns as to
any words of sermon or catechism. Our most positive convictions of
religious truth are apt to come to us in some line or stanza that
tells the whole story. The rhythm and the rhyme have helped to fix it
and hold it in the memory.

This is true not only of the hymns of the church but of many poems
that are not suitable for singing. English poetry is especially rich
in meditative and devotional elements, and of no period has this
been more true than of the nineteenth century. Cowper, Wordsworth,
Coleridge, the Brownings, Tennyson and Matthew Arnold, on the other
side of the sea, with Bryant, Longfellow, Emerson, Whittier,
Lowell, Holmes, Lanier, Sill and Gilder on this side--these and many
others--have made most precious additions to our store of religious
poetry. The century has been one of great perturbations in religious
thought; the advent of the evolutionary philosophy threatened all the
theological foundations, and there was need of a thorough revision
of the dogmas which were based on a mechanical theology, and of a
reinterpretation of the life of the Spirit. In all this the poets have
given us the strongest help. The great poet cannot be oblivious of
these deepest themes. He need not be a dogmatician, indeed he cannot
be, for his business is insight, not ratiocination; but the problems
which theology is trying to solve must always be before his mind, and
he must have something to say about them, if he hopes to command the
attention of thoughtful men. Yet while we need not depreciate
the service that has been rendered by preachers and professional
theologians who have sought to put the facts of the religious
life into the forms of the new philosophy, we must own our deeper
obligation to the poets, by whose vision the spiritual realities have
been most clearly discerned.

It was Wordsworth, perhaps, who gave us the first great contribution
to the new religious thought by bringing home to us the fact that God
is in his world; revealing himself now as clearly as in any of the
past ages. The truth of the Divine immanence, which is the foundation
of all the more positive religious thinking of to-day, and which
is destined, when once its import has been fully grasped, to
revolutionize our religious life, is made familiar to our thought
in Wordsworth's poetry. To him it was simply an experience; in quite
another sense than that in which it was true of Spinoza, it might have
been said of him that he was a "God-intoxicated man"; and although his
clear English sense permitted no pantheistic merging of the human in
the divine, but kept the individual consciousness clear for choice
and duty, the realization of the presence of God made nature in his
thought supernatural, and life sublime. To him, as Dr. Strong has
said, it was plain that "imagination in man enables him to enter into
the thought of God--the creative element in us is the medium through
which we perceive the meaning of the Creator in his creation. The
world without answers to the world within, because God is the soul of
both."

  "Such minds are truly from the Deity,
  For they are Powers; and hence the highest bliss
  That flesh can know is theirs,--the consciousness
  Of whom they are, habitually infused
  Through every image and through every thought,
  And all affections by communion raised
  From earth to heaven, from human to divine."

The mystical faith by which man is united to God can have no clearer
confession. And in the great poem of "Tintern Abbey" this truth
received an expression which has become classical;--it must be counted
one of the greatest words of that continuing revelation by which the
truths of religion are given permanent form:

                                "For I have learned
  To look on nature, not as in the hour
  Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
  The still, sad music of humanity,
  Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power
  To chasten and subdue. And I have felt
  A presence that disturbs me with the joy
  Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
  Of something far more deeply interfused,
  Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
  And the round ocean, and the living air,
  And the blue sky, and in the mind of man:
  A motion and a spirit, that impels
  All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
  And rolls through all things."

We can hardly imagine that the religious experience of mankind will
ever suffer these words to drop into forgetfulness; and it would seem
that every passing generation must deepen their significance.

The same great testimony to the divine Presence in our lives is borne
by many other witnesses in memorable words. Lowell's voice is clear:

  "No man can think, nor in himself perceive,
  Sometimes at waking, in the street sometimes,
  Or on the hillside, always unforwarned,
  A grace of being finer than himself,
  That beckons and is gone,--a larger life
  Upon his own impinging, with swift glimpse
  Of spacious circles, luminous with mind,
  To which the ethereal substance of his own
  Seems but gross cloud to make that visible,
  Touched to a sudden glory round the edge."

If to this central truth of religion,--the reality of the communion of
the human spirit with the divine--the poets have borne such impressive
testimony, not less positively have they asserted many other of the
great things of the spirit. Sometimes they have helped us to believe,
by identifying themselves with us in our struggles with the doubts
that loosen our hold on the great realities. No man of the last
century has done more for Christian belief than Alfred Tennyson,
albeit he has been a confessed doubter. But what he said of Arthur
Hallam is quite as true of himself:

  "He fought his doubts, and gathered strength,
    He would not make his judgment blind,
    He faced the spectres of the mind
  And laid them; thus he came at length,

  To find a stronger faith his own,
    And Power was with him in the night,
    Which makes the darkness and the light,
  And dwells not in the light alone."

Those words of his, so often quoted, are often sadly misused:

  "There lives more faith in honest doubt,
  Believe me, than in half the creeds."

When men make these words an excuse for an attitude of habitual
negation and denial, assuming that it is better to doubt everything
than to believe anything, they grossly pervert the poet's meaning. It
is the _faith_ that lives in honest doubt that his heart applauds. He
is thinking of the fact that it is real faith in God which leads men
to doubt the dogmas which misrepresent God. But conscious as he is of
the shadow that lies upon our field of vision, he is always insisting
that it is in the light and not in the shadow that we must walk.
Therefore, although demonstration is impossible, faith is rational. So
do those great words of "The Ancient Sage" admonish us:

  "Thou canst not prove that thou art body alone,
  Nor canst thou prove that thou art spirit alone,
  Nor canst thou prove that thou art both in one.
  Thou canst not prove thou art immortal, no,
  Nor yet that thou art mortal--nay, my son.
  Thou canst not prove that I who speak with thee,
  Am not thyself in converse with thyself,
  For nothing worthy proving can be proven
  Nor yet disproven. Wherefore be thou wise,
  Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt,
  And cling to Faith beyond the forms of Faith!
  She reels not in the storm of warring words,
  She brightens at the clash of 'Yes' and 'No,'
  She sees the best that glimmers through the worst,
  She feels the sun is hid but for a night,
  She spies the summer through the winter bud,
  She tastes the fruit before the blossom falls,
  She hears the lark within the songless egg,
  She finds the fountain where they wailed 'Mirage!'"

This illustrates Tennyson's mental attitude. If all who plume
themselves upon their doubts would put themselves into this posture of
mind, they would find themselves in possession of a very substantial
faith.

Tennyson has touched with light more than one problem of the soul. The
little stanza beginning

  "Flower in the crannied wall"

has shown us how the mysteries of being are shared by the commonest
lives; the short lyric "Wages" condenses into a few lines the
strongest proof of the life to come; and "Crossing the Bar" has borne
many a spirit in peace out to the boundless sea.

Robert Browning's robust faith helps us in a different way. His daring
and triumphant optimism makes us ashamed of doubt. In "Abt Vogler," in
"Rabbi Ben Ezra," in "Pompilia," in "Christmas Eve," we are caught up
and carried onward by an unflinching and overcoming faith. Perhaps the
most convincing arguments for religious reality in Browning's poems
are those of "An Epistle" and of "Cleon," where the cry of the human
soul for the assurance which the Christian faith supplies is given
such a penetrating voice. And there is no reasoning about the
Incarnation, in any theological book that I have ever read, which
seems to me so cogent as that great passage in "Saul," where David
cries:

  "Could I wrestle to raise him from sorrow, grow poor to enrich,
  To fill up his life, starve my own out. I would--knowing which,
  I know that my service is perfect. Oh, speak through me now!
  Would I suffer for him that I love? So wouldst thou--so wilt thou!"

But, after all, Browning's great hymns of faith are those in which he
faces the future, like "Prospice," and the prologue of "La Saisiaz,"
and the epilogue of "Asolando,"--triumphant songs, in which one of the
healthiest-minded of human beings showed himself:

  "One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
  Never doubted clouds would break,
  Never dreamed though right were worsted wrong would triumph,
  Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better, sleep to wake!"

It would be a grateful task to make extended record of the service
rendered to religion by the great choir of singers whose names appear
upon the pages of this book. To Elizabeth Barrett Browning our debt is
large, though her note is oftenest plaintive and the faith which she
illustrates is that by which suffering is turned to strength. Our own
New England psalmist, also, has been to great multitudes a revealer
and a comforter; few in any age have seen the central truths of
Christianity more clearly, or felt them more deeply, or uttered them
more convincingly. In such poems as "My Soul and I," "My Psalm," "Our
Master," "The Eternal Goodness," "The Brewing of Soma," and "Andrew
Ryckman's Prayer," Whittier has made the whole religious world his
debtor.

How many more there are--of those whom the world reckons as the
greater bards, and of those whom it assigns to lower places--to whom
we have found ourselves indebted for the clearing of our vision or the
quickening of our pulses, in our studies or our meditations upon the
deepest questions of life! How many there are, whose faces we
never saw, but who by some luminous word, some strain vibrant with
tenderness, some flash of insight, have endeared themselves to us
forever! They are the friends of our spirits, ministers to us of the
holiest things. They have clothed for us the highest truth in forms of
beauty; they have made it winsome and real and dear and memorable. Is
there anything better than this, that one man can do for another?

Washington Gladden

       *       *       *       *       *

A PASSAGE IN THE LIFE OF SAINT AUGUSTINE.


  Long pored Saint Austin o'er the sacred page,
    And doubt and darkness overspread his mind;
  On God's mysterious being thought the Sage,
    The Triple Person in one Godhead joined.
    The more he thought, the harder did he find
  To solve the various doubts which fast arose;
    And as a ship, caught by imperious wind,
  Tosses where chance its shattered body throws,
  So tossed his troubled soul, and nowhere found repose.

  Heated and feverish, then he closed his tome,
    And went to wander by the ocean-side,
  Where the cool breeze at evening loved to come,
    Murmuring responsive to the murmuring tide;
    And as Augustine o'er its margent wide
  Strayed, deeply pondering the puzzling theme,
    A little child before him he espied:
  In earnest labor did the urchin seem,
  Working with heart intent close by the sounding stream.

  He looked, and saw the child a hole had scooped,
    Shallow and narrow in the shining sand,
  O'er which at work the laboring infant stooped,
    Still pouring water in with busy hand.
    The saint addressed the child in accents bland:
  "Fair boy," quoth he, "I pray what toil is thine?
    Let me its end and purpose understand."
  The boy replied: "An easy task is mine,
  To sweep into this hole all the wide ocean's brine."

  "O foolish boy!" the saint exclaimed, "to hope
    That the broad ocean in that hole should lie!"
  "O foolish saint!" exclaimed the boy; "thy scope
    Is still more hopeless than the toil I ply,
    Who think'st to comprehend God's nature high
  In the small compass of thine human wit!
  Sooner, Augustine, sooner far, shall I
  Confine the ocean in this tiny pit,
  Than finite minds conceive God's nature infinite!"

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

MEDITATIONS OF A HINDU PRINCE.


  All the world over, I wonder, in lands that I never have trod,
  Are the people eternally seeking for the signs and steps of a God?
  Westward across the ocean, and Northward across the snow,
  Do they all stand gazing, as ever, and what do the wisest know?

  Here, in this mystical India, the deities hover and swarm
  Like the wild bees heard in the tree-tops, or the gusts of a gathering storm;
  In the air men hear their voices, their feet on the rocks are seen,
  Yet we all say, "Whence is the message, and what may the wonders mean?"

  A million shrines stand open, and ever the censer swings,
  As they bow to a mystic symbol, or the figures of ancient kings;
  And the incense rises ever, and rises the endless cry
  Of those who are heavy laden, and of cowards loth to die.

  For the Destiny drives us together, like deer in a pass of the hills;
  Above is the sky and around us the sound of the shot that kills;
  Pushed by a power we see not, and struck by a hand unknown,
  We pray to the trees for shelter, and press our lips to a stone.

  The trees wave a shadowy answer, and the rock frowns hollow and grim,
  And the form and the nod of the demon are caught in the twilight dim;
  And we look to the sunlight falling afar on the mountain crest,--
  Is there never a path runs upward to a refuge there and a rest?

  The path, ah! who has shown it, and which is the faithful guide?
  The haven, ah! who has known it? for steep is the mountain side,
  Forever the shot strikes surely, and ever the wasted breath
  Of the praying multitude rises, whose answer is only death.

  Here are the tombs of my kinsfolk, the fruit of an ancient name,
  Chiefs who were slain on the war-field, and women who died in flame;
  They are gods, these kings of the foretime, they are spirits who guard our race:
  Ever I watch and worship; they sit with a marble face.

  And the myriad idols round me, and the legion of muttering priests,
  The revels and rites unholy, the dark unspeakable feasts!
  What have they rung from the Silence? Hath even a whisper come
  Of the secret, Whence and Whither? Alas! for the gods are dumb.

  Shall I list to the word of the English, who come from the uttermost sea?
  "The Secret, hath it been told you, and what is your message to me?"
  It is naught but the wide-world story how the earth and the heavens began,
  How the gods are glad and angry, and a Deity once was man.

  I had thought, "Perchance in the cities where the rulers of India dwell,
  Whose orders flash from the far land, who girdle the earth with a spell,
  They have fathomed the depths we float on, or measured the unknown main--"
  Sadly they turn from the venture, and say that the quest is vain.

  Is life, then, a dream and delusion, and where shall the dreamer awake?
  Is the world seen like shadows on water, and what if the mirror break?
  Shall it pass as a camp that is struck, as a tent that is gathered and gone
  From the sands that were lamp-lit at eve, and at morning are level and lone?

  Is there naught in the heaven above, whence the hail and the levin are hurled,
  But the wind that is swept around us by the rush of the rolling world?
  The wind that shall scatter my ashes, and bear me to silence and sleep
  With the dirge, and the sounds of lamenting, and voices of women who weep.

SIR ALFRED COMYNS LYALL.


       *       *       *       *       *

BRAHMA.


  If the red slayer think he slays,
    Or if the slain think he is slain,
  They know not well the subtle ways
    I keep, and pass, and turn again.

  Far or forgot to me is near;
    Shadow and sunlight are the same;
  The vanished gods to me appear;
    And one to me are shame and fame.

  They reckon ill who leave me out;
    When me they fly, I am the wings;
  I am the doubter and the doubt,
    And I the hymn the Brahmin sings.

  The strong gods pine for my abode,
    And pine in vain the sacred Seven;
  But thou, meek lover of the good!
    Find me, and turn thy back on heaven.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

HYMN TO ZEUS.


  Most glorious of all the Undying, many-named, girt round with awe!
  Jove, author of Nature, applying to all things the rudder of law--
  Hail! Hail! for it justly rejoices the races whose life is a span
  To lift unto thee their voices--the Author and Framer of man.
  For we are thy sons; thou didst give us the symbols of speech at our birth,
  Alone of the things that live, and mortal move upon earth.
  Wherefore thou shalt find me extolling and ever singing thy praise;
  Since thee the great Universe, rolling on its path round the world, obeys:--
  Obeys thee, wherever thou guidest, and gladly is bound in thy bands,
  So great is the power thou confidest, with strong, invincible hands,
  To thy mighty ministering servant, the bolt of the thunder, that flies,
  Two-edged like a sword, and fervent, that is living and never dies.
  All nature, in fear and dismay, doth quake in the path of its stroke,
  What time thou preparest the way for the one Word thy lips have spoke,
  Which blends with lights smaller and greater, which pervadeth and thrilleth all things,
  So great is thy power and thy nature--in the Universe Highest of Kings!
  On earth, of all deeds that are done, O God! there is none without thee;
  In the holy ether not one, nor one on the face of the sea,
  Save the deeds that evil men, driven by their own blind folly, have planned;
  But things that have grown uneven are made even again by thy hand;
  And things unseemly grow seemly, the unfriendly are friendly to thee;
  For no good and evil supremely thou hast blended in one by decree.
  For all thy decree is one ever--a Word that endureth for aye,
  Which mortals, rebellious, endeavor to flee from and shun to obey--
  Ill-fated, that, worn with proneness for the lord-ship of goodly things,
  Neither hear nor behold, in its oneness, the law that divinity brings;
  Which men with reason obeying, might attain unto glorious life,
  No longer aimlessly straying in the paths of ignoble strife.
  There are men with a zeal unblest, that are wearied with following of fame,
  And men with a baser quest, that are turned to lucre and shame.
  There are men too that pamper and pleasure the flesh with delicate stings:
  All these desire beyond measure to be other than all these things.
  Great Jove, all-giver, dark-clouded, great Lord of the thunderbolt's breath!
  Deliver the men that are shrouded in ignorance dismal as death.
  O Father! dispel from their souls the darkness, and grant them the light
  Of reason, thy stay, when the whole wide world thou rulest with might,
  That we, being honored, may honor thy name with the music of hymns,
  Extolling the deeds of the Donor, unceasing, as rightly beseems
  Mankind; for no worthier trust is awarded to God or to man
  Than forever to glory with justice in the law that endures and is One.

From the Greek of CLEANTHES.


       *       *       *       *       *

TE DEUM LAUDAMUS.


  We praise thee, O God; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
  All the earth doth worship thee, the Father everlasting.
  To thee all Angels cry aloud; the Heavens, and all the powers therein.
  To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry,
  Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth;
  Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.
  The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee.
  The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise thee.
  The noble army of Martyrs praise thee.
  The holy Church throughout all the world doth acknowledge thee;
  The Father of an infinite Majesty;
  Thine adorable, true, and only Son;
  Also the Holy Ghost, the Comforter.
  Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ.
  Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.
  When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man, thou didst humble thyself to be born of a Virgin.
  When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death, thou didst open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.
  Thou sittest at the right hand of God, in the Glory of the Father.
  We believe that thou shalt come to be our Judge.
  We therefore pray thee, help thy servants, whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood.
  Make them to be numbered with thy Saints, in glory everlasting.
  O Lord, save thy people, and bless thine heritage.
  Govern them, and lift them up for ever.
  Day by day we magnify thee;
  And we worship thy Name ever, world without end.
  Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.
  O Lord, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us.
  O Lord, let thy mercy be upon us, as our trust is in thee.
  O Lord, in thee have I trusted; let me never be confounded.[A]

Version of the

AMERICAN EPISCOPAL CHURCH PRAYER-BOOK.

[Footnote A: This venerable hymn, familiar as a part of the morning
service in the Roman Catholic and Protestant Episcopal Churches, and
on special occasions in many Protestant Churches, has usually been
ascribed to the great St. Ambrose of Milan and St. Augustine, his
greater convert, in the year 387 A.D. But, like other productions of
mighty influence, it was doubtless a growth. Portions of it appear
in the writings of St. Cyprian (252 A.D.) and others in still earlier
liturgical forms of the Greek Church in Alexandria during the century
previous. It is thus probably the earliest, as it is certainly the
most universal and famous, of Christian hymns. It was translated from
the Latin into English in 1549 for the Anglican Book of Common Prayer,
which assumed its present form in 1660--during that wonderful era
which gave us the English Bible, with its unapproached majesty and
music of language.]


       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER.


  Father of all! in every age,
    In every clime adored,
  By saint, by savage, and by sage,
    Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!

  Thou great First Cause, least understood,
    Who all my sense confined
  To know but this, that thou art good,
    And that myself am blind;

  Yet gave me, in this dark estate,
    To see the good from ill;
  And, binding nature fast in fate,
    Left free the human will:

  What conscience dictates to be done,
    Or warns me not to do,
  This, teach me more than hell to shun,
    That, more than heaven pursue.

  What blessings thy free bounty gives
    Let me not cast away;
  For God is paid when man receives,
    To enjoy is to obey.

  Yet not to earth's contracted span
    Thy goodness let me bound,
  Or think thee Lord alone of man,
    When thousand worlds are round:

  Let not this weak, unknowing hand
    Presume thy bolts to throw,
  And deal damnation round the land
    On each I judge thy foe.

  If I am right thy grace impart
    Still in the right to stay;
  If I am wrong, O, teach my heart
    To find that better way!

  Save me alike from foolish pride
    And impious discontent
  At aught thy wisdom has dented,
    Or aught thy goodness lent.

  Teach me to feel another's woe,
    To hide the fault I see;
  That mercy I to others show,
    That mercy show to me.

  Mean though I am, not wholly so,
    Since quickened by thy breath;
  O, lead me wheresoe'er I go,
    Through this day's life or death!

  This day be bread and peace my lot;
    All else beneath the sun,
  Thou knowest if best bestowed or not,
    And let thy will be done.

  To thee, whose temple is all space,
    Whose altar, earth, sea, skies,
  One chorus let all Being raise,
    All Nature incense rise!

ALEXANDER POPE.


       *       *       *       *       *

ODE.

FROM "THE SPECTATOR."


  The spacious firmament on high,
  With all the blue ethereal sky,
  And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
  Their great Original proclaim;
  The unwearied sun, from day to day,
  Does his Creator's power display,
  And publishes to every land
  The work of an Almighty hand.

  Soon as the evening shades prevail,
  The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
  And nightly to the listening earth
  Repeats the story of her birth;
  While all the stars that round her burn,
  And all the planets in their turn,
  Confirm the tidings as they roll,
  And spread the truth from pole to pole.

  What though, in solemn silence, all
  Move round the dark terrestrial ball?
  What though no real voice or sound
  Amid their radiant orbs be found?
  In Reason's ear they all rejoice,
  And utter forth a glorious voice,
  Forever singing, as they shine,
  "The hand that made us is divine!"

JOSEPH ADDISON.


       *       *       *       *       *

LORD! WHEN THOSE GLORIOUS LIGHTS I SEE.

    HYMN AND PRAYER FOR THE USE OF BELIEVERS.


  Lord! when those glorious lights I see
    With which thou hast adorned the skies,
  Observing how they moved be,
    And how their splendor fills mine eyes,
  Methinks it is too large a grace,
    But that thy love ordained it so,--
  That creatures in so high a place
    Should servants be to man below.

  The meanest lamp now shining there
    In size and lustre doth exceed
  The noblest of thy creatures here,
    And of our friendship hath no need.
  Yet these upon mankind attend
    For secret aid or public light;
  And from the world's extremest end
    Repair unto us every night.

  O, had that stamp been undefaced
    Which first on us thy hand had set,
  How highly should we have been graced,
    Since we are so much honored yet!
  Good God, for what but for the sake
    Of thy beloved and only Son,
  Who did on him our nature take,
    Were these exceeding favors done?

  As we by him have honored been,
    Let us to him due honors give;
  Let us uprightness hide our sin,
    And let us worth from him receive.
  Yea, so let us by grace improve
    What thou by nature doth bestow,
  That to thy dwelling-place above
    We may be raised from below.

GEORGE WITHER.


       *       *       *       *       *

HYMN

    BEFORE SUNRISE, IN THE VALE OF CHAMOUNI.


  Hast thou a charm to stay the morning star
  In his steep course? So long he seems to pause
  On thy bald, awful head, O sovran Blanc!
  The Arve and Arveiron at thy base
  Rave ceaselessly; but thou, most awful Form,
  Risest from forth thy silent sea of pines
  How silently! Around thee and above,
  Deep is the air and dark, substantial, black--
  An ebon mass. Methinks thou piercest it,
  As with a wedge! But when I look again,
  It is thine own calm home, thy crystal shrine,
  Thy habitation from eternity!
  O dread and silent Mount! I gazed upon thee,
  Till thou, still present to the bodily sense,
  Didst vanish from my thought. Entranced in prayer
  I worshipped the Invisible alone.

    Yet, like some sweet beguiling melody,
  So sweet we know not we are listening to it,
  Thou, the mean while, wast blending with my thought,--
  Yea, with my life and life's own secret joy,--
  Till the dilating soul, enrapt, transfused,
  Into the mighty vision passing, there,
  As in her natural form, swelled vast to Heaven!

    Awake, my soul! not only passive praise
  Thou owest! not alone these swelling tears,
  Mute thanks, and secret ecstasy! Awake,
  Voice of sweet song! Awake, my heart, awake!
  Green vales and icy cliffs, all join my hymn.

    Thou first and chief, sole sovereign of the vale!
  O, struggling with the darkness all the night,
  And visited all night by troops of stars,
  Or when they climb the sky, or when they sink,
  Companion of the morning-star at dawn,
  Thyself Earth's rosy star, and of the dawn
  Co-herald,--wake, O, wake, and utter praise!
  Who sank thy sunless pillars deep in earth?
  Who filled thy countenance with rosy light?
  Who made thee parent of perpetual streams?

    And you, ye five wild torrents fiercely glad!
  Who called you forth from night and utter death,
  From dark and icy caverns called you forth,
  Down those precipitous, black, jagged rocks,
  Forever shattered and the same forever?
  Who gave you your invulnerable life,
  Your strength, your speed, your fury, and your joy,
  Unceasing thunder and eternal foam?
  And who commanded (and the silence came),
  Here let the billows stiffen, and have rest?

    Ye ice-falls! ye that from the mountain's brow
  Adown enormous ravines slope amain,--
  Torrents, methinks, that heard a mighty voice,
  And stopped at once amid their maddest plunge!
  Motionless torrents! silent cataracts!
  Who made you glorious as the gates of Heaven
  Beneath the keen full moon? Who bade the sun
  Clothe you with rainbows? Who, with living flowers
  Of loveliest blue, spread garlands at your feet?
  God!--let the torrents, like a shout of nations,
  Answer! and let the ice-plains echo, God!
  God! sing, ye meadow-streams, with gladsome voice!
  Ye pine-groves, with your soft and soul-like sounds!
  And they too have a voice, yon piles of snow,
  And in their perilous fall shall thunder, God!

    Ye living flowers that skirt the eternal frost!
  Ye wild goats sporting round the eagle's nest!
  Ye eagles, playmates of the mountain-storm!
  Ye lightnings, the dread arrows of the clouds!
  Ye signs and wonders of the elements!
  Utter forth God, and fill the hills with praise!

    Thou, too, hoar Mount! with thy sky-pointing peaks,
  Oft from whose feet the avalanche, unheard,
  Shoots downward, glittering through the pure serene,
  Into the depth of clouds that veil thy breast,--
  Thou too again, stupendous Mountain! thou
  That, as I raise my head, awhile bowed low
  In adoration, upward from thy base
  Slow travelling with dim eyes suffused with tears,
  Solemnly seemest, like a vapory cloud,
  To rise before me,--Rise, O, ever rise!
  Rise, like a cloud of incense from the Earth!
  Thou kingly Spirit throned among the hills,
  Thou dread ambassador from Earth to Heaven,
  Great Hierarch! tell thou the silent sky,
  And tell the stars, and tell yon rising sun,
  Earth with her thousand voices, praises God.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE HILLS OF THE LORD.


  God ploughed one day with an earthquake,
    And drove his furrows deep!
  The huddling plains upstarted.
    The hills were all a-leap!

  But that is the mountains' secret,
    Age-hidden in their breast;
  "God's peace is everlasting,"
    Are the dream-words of their rest.

  He hath made them the haunt of beauty,
    The home elect of his grace;
  He spreadeth his mornings on them,
    His sunsets light their face.

  His thunders tread in music
    Of footfalls echoing long,
  And carry majestic greeting
    Around the silent throng.

  His winds bring messages to them,
    Wild storm-news from the main;
  They sing it down to the valleys
    In the love-song of the rain.

  Green tribes from far come trooping,
    And over the uplands flock;
  He weaveth the zones together
    In robes for his risen rock.

  They are nurseries for young rivers;
    Nests for his flying cloud;
  Homesteads for new-born races,
    Masterful, free, and proud.

  The people of tired cities
    Come up to their shrines and pray;
  God freshens again within them,
    As he passes by all day.

  And lo, I have caught their secret,
    The beauty deeper than all.
  This faith--that life's hard moments,
    When the jarring sorrows befall,

  Are but God ploughing his mountains;
    And the mountains yet shall be
  The source of his grace and freshness
    And his peace everlasting to me.

WILLIAM CHANNING GANNETT.


       *       *       *       *       *

SUNRISE.


  As on my bed at dawn I mused and prayed,
  I saw my lattice prankt upon the wall,
  The flaunting leaves and flitting birds withal--
  A sunny phantom interlaced with shade;
  "Thanks be to Heaven," in happy mood I said,
  "What sweeter aid my matins could befall
  Than this fair glory from the east hath made?
  What holy sleights hath God, the Lord of all,
  To bid us feel and see! We are not free
  To say we see not, for the glory comes
  Nightly and daily, like the flowing sea;
  His lustre pierces through the midnight glooms,
  And at prime hours, behold! he follows me
  With golden shadows to my secret rooms."

CHARLES TENNYSON TURNER.


       *       *       *       *       *

GOD AND MAN.

    FROM THE "ESSAY ON MAN," EPISTLES I AND IV.


    Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind
  Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind:
  His soul, proud science never taught to stray
  Far as the solar walk or Milky Way:
  Yet simple Nature to his hope has given,
  Behind the cloud-topt hill, an humbler heaven;
  Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
  Some happier island in the watery waste,
  Where slaves once more their native land behold,
  No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold.
  To Be, contents his natural desire;
  He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire;
  But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
  His faithful dog shall bear him company.
    Go, wiser thou! and in thy scale of sense,
  Weigh thy opinion against Providence:
  Call imperfection what thou fancy'st such,--
  Say, here he gives too little, there too much;
  Destroy all creatures for thy sport or gust,
  Yet cry, If man's unhappy, God's unjust,--
  If man alone engross not Heaven's high care,
  Alone made perfect here, immortal there;
  Snatch from his hand the balance and the rod,
  Re-judge his justice, be the god of God.
  In pride, in reasoning pride, our error lies;
  All quit their sphere, and rush into the skies.
  Pride still is aiming at the blest abodes:
  Men would be angels, angels would be gods.
  Aspiring to be gods, if angels fell,
  Aspiring to be angels, men rebel;
  And who but wishes to invert the laws
  Of Order, sins against the Eternal Cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

    All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
  Whose body Nature is, and God the soul:
  That, changed through all, and yet in all the same;
  Great in the earth as in the ethereal frame;
  Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
  Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees,
  Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
  Spreads undivided, operates unspent:
  Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
  As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart;
  As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
  As the rapt seraph that adores and burns:
  To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
  He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.
    Cease then, nor order imperfection name:
  Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
  Know thy own point: This kind, this due degree
  Of blindness, weakness, Heaven bestows on thee.
  Submit.--In this or any other sphere,
  Secure to be as blest as thou canst bear;
  Safe in the hand of one disposing Power,
  Or in the natal or the mortal hour.
  All nature is but art unknown to thee;
  All chance, direction which thou canst not see;
  All discord, harmony not understood;
  All partial evil, universal good:
  And, spite of pride, in erring reason's spite,
  One truth is clear--Whatever is, is right.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Order is Heaven's first law: and, this confest,
  Some are and must be greater than the rest,
  More rich, more wise; but who infers from hence
  That such are happier, shocks all common-sense.
  Heaven to mankind impartial we confess,
  If all are equal in their happiness:
  But mutual wants this happiness increase;
  All nature's difference keeps all nature's peace.
  Condition, circumstance, is not the thing:
  Bliss is the same in subject or in king,
  In who obtain defence or who defend,
  In him who is or him who finds a friend;
  Heaven breathes through every member of the whole
  One common blessing, as one common soul.

ALEXANDER POPE.


       *       *       *       *       *

LIGHT SHINING OUT OF DARKNESS.


  God moves in a mysterious way
    His wonders to perform;
  He plants His footsteps in the sea,
    And rides upon the storm.

  Deep in unfathomable mines
    Of never-failing skill,
  He treasures up His bright designs,
    And works His sovereign will.

  Ye fearful, fresh courage take!
    The clouds ye so much dread
  Are big with mercy, and shall break
    In blessings on your head.

  Judge not the Lord by feeble sense.
    But trust Him for His grace:
  Behind a frowning providence
    He hides a smiling face.

  His purposes will ripen fast,
    Unfolding every hour;
  The bud may have a bitter taste.
    But sweet will be the flower.

  Blind unbelief is sure to err,
    And scan His work in vain:
  God is His own interpreter,
    And He will make it plain.

WILLIAM COWPER.


       *       *       *       *       *

GOD.


  O thou eternal One! whose presence bright
    All space doth occupy, all motion guide.
  Unchanged through time's all-devastating flight!
    Thou only God--there is no God beside!
  Being above all beings! Mighty One,
    Whom none can comprehend and none explore!
  Who fill'st existence with Thyself alone--
    Embracing all, supporting, ruling o'er,
    Being whom we call God, and know no more!

  In its sublime research, philosophy
    May measure out the ocean-deep--may count
  The sands or the sun's rays--but, God! for Thee
    There is no weight nor measure; none can mount
  Up to Thy mysteries; Reason's brightest spark,
    Though kindled by Thy light, in vain would try
  To trace Thy counsels, infinite and dark;
    And thought is lost ere thought can soar so high,
    Even like past moments in eternity.

  Thou from primeval nothingness didst call
    First chaos, then existence--Lord! in Thee
  Eternity had its foundation; all
    Sprung forth from Thee--of light, joy, harmony,
  Sole Origin--all life, all beauty Thine;
    Thy word created all, and doth create;
  Thy splendor fills all space with rays divine;
    Thou art, and wert, and shall be! Glorious! Great!
    Light-giving, life-sustaining potentate!

  Thy chains the unmeasured universe surround--
    Upheld by Thee, by Thee inspired with breath!
  Thou the beginning with the end hast bound,
    And beautifully mingled life and death!
  As sparks mount upwards from the fiery blaze;
    So suns are born, so worlds spring forth from Thee;
  And as the spangles in the sunny rays
    Shine round the silver snow, the pageantry
  Of heaven's bright army glitters in Thy praise.

  A million torches lighted by Thy hand
    Wander unwearied through the blue abyss--
  They own Thy power, accomplish Thy command,
    All gay with life, all eloquent with bliss.
  What shall we call them? Piles of crystal light--
    A glorious company of golden streams--
  Lamps of celestial ether burning bright--
    Suns lighting systems with their joyous beams?
  But Thou to these art as the noon to night.

  Yes! as a drop of water in the sea,
    All this magnificence in Thee is lost:--
  What are ten thousand worlds compared to Thee?
    And what am I then?--Heaven's unnumbered host,
  Though multiplied by myriads, and arrayed
    In all the glory of sublimest thought,
  Is but an atom in the balance, weighed
    Against Thy greatness--is a cipher brought
    Against infinity! What am I then? Naught!

  Naught! But the effluence of Thy light divine,
    Pervading worlds, hath reached my bosom too;
  Yes! in my spirit doth Thy spirit shine,
    As shines the sunbeam in a drop of dew.
  Naught! but I live, and on hope's pinions fly
    Eager towards Thy presence--for in Thee
  I live, and breathe, and dwell, aspiring high,
    Even to the throne of Thy divinity;
    I am, O God! and surely Thou must be!

  Thou art!--directing, guiding all--Thou art!
    Direct my understanding then to Thee;
  Control my spirit, guide my wandering heart;
    Though but an atom midst immensity,
  Still I am something fashioned by Thy hand!
    I hold a middle rank 'twixt heaven and earth--
  On the last verge of mortal being stand,
    Close to the realms where angels have their birth,
  Just on the boundaries of the spirit land!

  The chain of being is complete in me--
    In me is matter's last gradation lost,
  And the next step is spirit--Deity!
    I can command the lightning and am dust!
  A monarch and a slave--a worm, a god!
    Whence came I here, and how? so marvellously
  Constructed and conceived? unknown! this clod
    Lives surely through some higher energy;
    For from itself alone it could not be!

  Creator, yes! Thy wisdom and Thy word
    Created me! Thou source of life and good!
  Thou spirit of my spirit, and my Lord!
    Thy light, Thy love, in their bright plenitude
  Filled me with an immortal soul, to spring
    Over the abyss of death; and bade it wear
  The garments of eternal day, and wing
    Its heavenly flight beyond this little sphere,
    Even to its source, to Thee, its author there.

  Oh thoughts ineffable! oh visions blest!
    Though worthless our conceptions all of Thee.
  Yet shall Thy shadowed image fill our breast,
    And waft its homage to Thy deity.
  God! thus alone my lowly thoughts can soar,
    Thus seek Thy presence--Being wise and good!
  Midst Thy vast works admire, obey, adore;
  And when the tongue is eloquent no more,
    The soul shall speak in tears of gratitude.

From the Russian of GAVRIÍL ROMÁNOVITCH DERSHÁVIN.

Translation of SIR JOHN BOWRING.


       *       *       *       *       *

GOD IS EVERYWHERE.


  A trodden daisy, from the sward,
    With tearful eye I took,
  And on its ruined glories I,
    With moving heart, did look;
  For, crushed and broken though it was,
    That little flower was fair;
  And oh! I loved the dying bud,
    For God was there!

  I stood upon the sea-beat shore,
    The waves came rushing on;
  The tempest raged in giant wrath,
    The light of day was gone.
  The sailor from his drowning bark
    Sent up his dying prayer;
  I looked amid the ruthless storm,
    And God was there!

  I sought a lonely, woody dell,
    Where all things soft and sweet,
  Birds, flowers, and trees, and running streams,
    Mid bright sunshine did meet:
  I stood beneath an old oak's shade,
    And summer round was fair;
  I gazed upon the peaceful scene,
    And God was there!

  I saw a home--a happy home--
    Upon a bridal day,
  And youthful hearts were blithesome there,
    And aged hearts were gay:
  I sat amid the smiling band
    Where all so blissful were--
  Among the bridal maidens sweet--
    And God was there!

  I stood beside an infant's couch,
    When light had left its eye--
  I saw the mother's bitter tears,
    I heard her woful cry--
  I saw her kiss its fair pale face,
    And smooth its yellow hair;
  And oh, I loved the mourner's home,
    For God was there!

  I sought a cheerless wilderness--
    A desert, pathless wild--
  Where verdure grew not by the streams,
    Where beauty never smiled;
  Where desolation brooded o'er
    A muirland lone and bare,
  And awe upon my spirit crept,
    For God was there!

  I looked upon the lowly flower,
    And on each blade of grass;
  Upon the forests, wide and deep,
    I saw the tempests pass:
  I gazed on all created things
    In earth, in sea, and air;
  Then bent the knee--for God, in love,
    Was everywhere!

ROBERT NICOLL.


       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKED IN THE CRADLE OF THE DEEP.


  Rocked in the cradle of the deep
  I lay me down in peace to sleep;
  Secure I rest upon the wave,
  For thou, O Lord! hast power to save.
  I know thou wilt not slight my call,
  For thou dost mark the sparrow's fall;
  And calm and peaceful shall I sleep,
  Rocked in the cradle of the deep.

  When in the dead of night I lie
  And gaze upon the trackless sky,
  The star-bespangled heavenly scroll,
  The boundless waters as they roll,--
  I feel thy wondrous power to save
  From perils of the stormy wave:
  Rocked in the cradle of the deep,
  I calmly rest and soundly sleep.

  And such the trust that still were mine,
  Though stormy winds swept o'er the brine,
  Or though the tempest's fiery breath
  Roused me from sleep to wreck and death.
  In ocean cave, still safe with Thee
  The germ of immortality!
  And calm and peaceful shall I sleep,
  Rocked in the cradle of the deep.

EMMA HART WILLARD.


       *       *       *       *       *

GOOD-BYE.


  Good-bye, proud world, I'm going home:
  Thou art not my friend, and I'm not thine.
  Long through thy weary crowds I roam;
  A river-ark on the ocean brine,
  Long I've been tossed like the driven foam,
  But now, proud world, I'm going home.

  Good-bye to Flattery's fawning face;
  To Grandeur with his wise grimace;
  To upstart Wealth's averted eye;
  To supple Office, low and high;
  To crowded halls, to court and street;
  To frozen hearts and hasting feet;
  To those who go, and those who come;
  Good-bye, proud world! I'm going home.

  I'm going to my own hearth-stone,
  Bosomed in yon green hills alone,--
  A secret nook in a pleasant land,
  Whose groves the frolic fairies planned;
  Where arches green, the livelong day,
  Echo the blackbird's roundelay,
  And vulgar feet have never trod
  A spot that is sacred to thought and God.

  O, when I am safe in my sylvan home,
  I tread on the pride of Greece and Rome;
  And when I am stretched beneath the pines,
  Where the evening star so holy shines,
  I laugh at the lore and the pride of man,
  At the sophist schools, and the learned clan;
  For what are they all in their high conceit,
  When man in the bush with God may meet?

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

OUR GOD, OUR HELP IN AGES PAST.


  Our God, our help in ages past,
    Our hope for years to come,
  Our shelter from the stormy blast,
    And our eternal home,--

  Under the shadow of thy throne
    Thy saints have dwelt secure;
  Sufficient is thine arm alone,
    And our defence is sure.

  Before the hills in order stood,
    Or earth received her frame,
  From everlasting thou art God,
    To endless years the same.

  A thousand ages in thy sight
    Are like an evening gone;
  Short as the watch that ends the night
    Before the rising sun.

  Time like an ever-rolling stream
    Bears all its sons away;
  They fly, forgotten, as a dream
    Dies at the opening day.

  Our God, our help in ages past,
    Our hope for years to come,
  Be thou our guard while troubles last,
    And our eternal home.

ISAAC WATTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

A MIGHTY FORTRESS IS OUR GOD.

    "EIN' FESTE BURG IST UNSER GOTT."


  A mighty fortress is our God,
    A bulwark never failing;
  Our helper he amid the flood
    Of mortal ills prevailing.
  For still our ancient foe
  Doth seek to work us woe;
  His craft and power are great,
  And, armed with equal hate,
    On earth is not his equal.

  Did we in our own strength confide,
    Our striving would be losing;
  Were not the right man on our side,
    The man of God's own choosing.
  Dost ask who that may be?
  Christ Jesus, it is he,
  Lord Sabaoth his name,
  From age to age the same,
    And he must win the battle.

From the German of MARTIN LUTHER.

Translation of FREDERIC HENRY HEDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

DELIGHT IN GOD.


  I love, and have some cause to love, the earth,--
    She is my Maker's creature, therefore good;
  She is my mother, for she gave me birth;
    She is my tender nurse, she gives me food:
    But what's a creature, Lord, compared with thee?
    Or what's my mother or my nurse to me?

  I love the air,--her dainty sweets refresh
    My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me;
  Her shrill-mouthed choir sustain me with their flesh,
    And with their polyphonian notes delight me:
    But what's the air, or all the sweets that she
    Can bless my soul withal, compared to thee?

  I love the sea,--she is my fellow-creature,
    My careful purveyor; she provides me store;
  She walls me round; she makes my diet greater;
    She wafts my treasure from a foreign shore:
    But, Lord of oceans, when compared with thee,
    What is the ocean or her wealth to me?

  To heaven's high city I direct my journey,
    Whose spangled suburbs entertain mine eye;
  Mine eye, by contemplation's great attorney,
    Transcends the crystal pavement of the sky:
    But what is heaven, great God, compared to thee?
    Without thy presence, heaven's no heaven to me.

  Without thy presence, earth gives no refection;
    Without thy presence, sea affords no treasure;
  Without thy presence, air's a rank infection;
    Without thy presence, heaven's itself no pleasure:
    If not possessed, if not enjoyed in thee,
    What's earth, or sea, or air, or heaven to me?

  The highest honors that the world can boast
    Are subjects far too low for my desire;
  The brightest beams of glory are, at most,
    But dying sparkles of thy living fire;
    The loudest flames that earth can kindle be
    But nightly glow-worms, if compared to thee.

  Without thy presence, wealth is bags of cares;
    Wisdom but folly; joy, disquiet--sadness;
  Friendship is treason, and delights are snares;
    Pleasures but pain, and mirth but pleasing madness;
    Without thee, Lord, things be not what they be,
    Nor have their being, when compared with thee.

  In having all things, and not thee, what have I?
    Not having thee, what have my labors got?
  Let me enjoy but thee, what further crave I?
    And having thee alone, what have I not?
    I wish nor sea nor land; nor would I be
    Possessed of heaven, heaven unpossessed of thee!

FRANCIS QUARLES.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE WILL OF GOD.


  I worship thee, sweet will of God!
    And all thy ways adore;
  And every day I live, I seem
    To love thee more and more.

  Thou wert the end, the blessèd rule
    Of our Saviour's toils and tears;
  Thou wert the passion of his heart
    Those three and thirty years.

  And he hath breathed into my soul
    A special love of thee,
  A love to lose my will in his,
    And by that loss be free.

  I love to see thee bring to naught
    The plans of wily men;
  When simple hearts outwit the wise,
    Oh, thou art loveliest then.

  The headstrong world it presses hard
    Upon the church full oft,
  And then how easily thou turn'st
    The hard ways into soft.

  I love to kiss each print where thou
    Hast set thine unseen feet;
  I cannot fear thee, blessèd will!
    Thine empire is so sweet.

  When obstacles and trials seem
    Like prison walls to be,
  I do the little I can do,
    And leave the rest to thee.

  I know not what it is to doubt,
    My heart is ever gay;
  I run no risk, for, come what will,
    Thou always hast thy way.

  I have no cares, O blessèd will!
    For all my cares are thine:
  I live in triumph, Lord! for thou
    Hast made thy triumphs mine.

  And when it seems no chance or change
    From grief can set me free,
  Hope finds its strength in helplessness,
    And gayly waits on thee.

  Man's weakness, waiting upon God,
    Its end can never miss,
  For men on earth no work can do
    More angel-like than this.

  Ride on, ride on, triumphantly,
    Thou glorious will, ride on!
  Faith's pilgrim sons behind thee take
    The road that thou hast gone.

  He always wins who sides with God,
    To him no chance is lost;
  God's will is sweetest to him, when
    It triumphs at his cost.

  Ill that he blesses is our good,
    And unblessed good is ill;
  And all is right that seems most wrong.
    If it be his sweet will.

FREDERICK WILLIAM FABER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE VOYAGE.


  Whichever way the wind doth blow,
  Some heart is glad to have it so;
  Then blow it east or blow it west,
  The wind that blows, that wind is best.

  My little craft sails not alone:
  A thousand fleets from every zone
  Are out upon a thousand seas;
  And what for me were favoring breeze
  Might dash another, with the shock
  Of doom, upon some hidden rock.

  And so I do not dare to pray
  For winds to waft me on my way,
  But leave it to a Higher Will
  To stay or speed me; trusting still
  That all is well, and sure that He
  Who launched my bark will sail with me
  Through storm and calm, and will not fail,
  Whatever breezes may prevail,
  To land me, every peril past,
  Within his sheltering heaven at last.

  Then, whatsoever wind doth blow,
  My heart is glad to have it so;
  And blow it east or blow it west,
  The wind that blows, that wind is best.

CAROLINE ATHERTON MASON.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOVE OF GOD.


  Thou Grace Divine, encircling all,
    A soundless, shoreless sea!
  Wherein at last our souls must fall,
    O Love of God most free!

  When over dizzy heights we go,
    One soft hand blinds our eyes,
  The other leads us, safe and slow,
    O Love of God most wise!

  And though we turn us from thy face,
    And wander wide and long,
  Thou hold'st us still in thine embrace,
    O Love of God most strong!

  The saddened heart, the restless soul,
    The toil-worn frame and mind,
  Alike confess thy sweet control,
    O Love of God most kind!

  But not alone thy care we claim,
    Our wayward steps to win;
  We know thee by a dearer name,
    O Love of God within!

  And, filled and quickened by thy breath,
    Our souls are strong and free
  To rise o'er sin and fear and death,
    O Love of God, to thee!

ELIZA SCUDDER.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAISE TO GOD.


  Praise to God, immortal praise,
  For the love that crowns our days--
  Bounteous source of every joy,
  Let Thy praise our tongues employ!

  For the blessings of the field,
  For the stores the gardens yield,
  For the vine's exalted juice,
  For the generous olive's use;

  Flocks that, whiten all the plain,
  Yellow sheaves of ripened grain,
  Clouds that drop their fattening dews,
  Suns that temperate warmth diffuse--

  All that Spring, with bounteous hand,
  Scatters o'er the smiling land;
  All that liberal Autumn pours
  From her rich o'erflowing stores:

  These to Thee, my God, we owe--
  Source whence all our blessings flow!
  And for these my soul shall raise
  Grateful vows and solemn praise.

  Yet should rising whirlwinds tear
  From its stem the ripening ear--
  Should the fig-tree's blasted shoot
  Drop her green untimely fruit--

  Should the vine put forth no more,
  Nor the olive yield her store--
  Though the sickening flocks should fall,
  And the herds desert the stall--

  Should Thine altered hand restrain
  The early and the latter rain,
  Blast each opening bud of joy,
  And the rising year destroy;

  Yet to Thee my soul should raise
  Grateful vows and solemn praise,
  And when every blessing's flown,
  Love Thee--for Thyself alone.

ANNA LAETITIA BARBAULD.


       *       *       *       *       *

LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT.


  Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
      Lead thou me on!
  The night is dark, and I am far from home,--
      Lead thou me on!
  Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see
  The distant scene,--one step enough for me.

  I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou
      Shouldst lead me on:
  I loved to choose and see my path, but now
      Lead thou me on!
  I loved the garish days, and, spite of fears,
  Pride ruled my will: remember not past years.

  So long thy power hath blessed me, sure it still
    Will lead me on;
  O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till
    The night is gone;
  And with the morn those angel faces smile
  Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.

JOHN HENRY NEWMAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE ETERNAL GOODNESS.


  O friends! with whom my feet have trod
    The quiet aisles of prayer,
  Glad witness to your zeal for God
    And love of man I bear.

  I trace your lines of argument;
    Your logic linked and strong
  I weigh as one who dreads dissent,
    And fears a doubt as wrong.

  But still my human hands are weak
    To hold your iron creeds:
  Against the words ye bid me speak
    My heart within me pleads.

  Who fathoms the Eternal Thought?
    Who talks of scheme and plan?
  The Lord is God! He needeth not
    The poor device of man.

  I walk with bare, hushed feet the ground
    Ye tread with boldness shod;
  I dare not fix with mete and bound
    The love and power of God.

  Ye praise His justice; even such
    His pitying love I deem:
  Ye seek a king; I fain would touch
    The robe that hath no seam.

  Ye see the curse which overbroods
    A world of pain and loss:
  I hear our Lord's beatitudes
    And prayer upon the cross.

  More than your schoolmen teach, within
    Myself, alas! I know:
  Too dark ye cannot paint the sin,
    Too small the merit show.

  I bow my forehead to the dust,
    I veil mine eyes for shame,
  And urge, in trembling self-distrust,
    A prayer without a claim.

  I see the wrong that round me lies,
    I feel the guilt within;
  I hear, with groan and travail-cries,
    The world confess its sin.

  Yet, in the maddening maze of things,
    And tossed by storm and flood,
  To one fixed trust my spirit clings;
    I know that God is good!

  Not mine to look where cherubim
    And seraphs may not see,
  But nothing can be good in Him
    Which evil is in me.

  The wrong that pains my soul below
    I dare not throne above,
  I know not of His hate,--I know
    His goodness and His love.

  I dimly guess from blessings known
    Of greater out of sight,
  And, with the chastened Psalmist, own
    His judgments too are right.

  I long for household voices gone,
    For vanished smiles I long,
  But God hath led my dear ones on,
    And He can do no wrong.

  I know not what the future hath
    Of marvel or surprise.
  Assured alone that life and death
    His mercy underlies.

  And if my heart and flesh are weak
    To bear an untried pain,
  The bruisèd reed He will not break,
    But strengthen and sustain.

  No offering of my own I have.
    Nor works my faith to prove;
  I can but give the gifts He gave,
    And plead His love for love.

  And so beside the Silent Sea
    I wait the muffled oar;
  No harm from Him can come to me
    On ocean or on shore.

  I know not where His islands lift
    Their fronded palms in air;
  I only know I cannot drift
    Beyond His love and care.

  O brothers! if my faith is vain,
    If hopes like these betray,
  Pray for me that my feet may gain
    The sure and safer way.

  And Thou, O Lord! by whom are seen
    Thy creatures as they be,
  Forgive me if too close I lean
    My human heart on Thee!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.


       *       *       *       *       *

STRONG SON OF GOD, IMMORTAL LOVE.

    FROM "IN MEMORIAM," INTRODUCTION.


  Strong Son of God, immortal Love,
    Whom we, that have not seen thy face,
    By faith, and faith alone, embrace,
  Believing where we cannot prove;

  Thine are these orbs of light and shade;
    Thou madest Life in man and brute;
    Thou madest Death; and lo, thy foot
  Is on the skull which thou hast made.

  Thou wilt not leave us in the dust:
    Thou madest man, he knows not why;
    He thinks he was not made to die;
  And thou hast made him: thou art just.

  Thou seemest human and divine,
    The highest, holiest manhood, thou:
    Our wills are ours, we know not how;
  Our wills are ours, to make them thine.

  Our little systems have their day;
    They have their day and cease to be:
    They are but broken lights of thee,
  And thou, O Lord, art more than they.

  We have but faith: we cannot know;
    For knowledge is of things we see;
    And yet we trust it comes from thee,
  A beam in darkness: let it grow.

  Let knowledge grow from more to more,
    But more of reverence in us dwell;
    That mind and soul, according well,
  May make one music as before,

  But vaster. We are fools and slight;
    We mock thee when we do not fear:
    But help thy foolish ones to bear;
  Help thy vain worlds to bear thy light.

  Forgive what seemed my sin in me;
    What seemed my worth since I began;
    For merit lives from man to man,
  And not from man, O Lord, to thee.

  Forgive my grief for one removed,
    Thy creature, whom I found so fair.
  I trust he lives in thee, and there
    I find him worthier to be loved.

  Forgive these wild and wandering cries,
    Confusions of a wasted youth;
  Forgive them where they fail in truth,
    And in thy wisdom make me wise.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

O LITTLE TOWN OF BETHLEHEM.


  O little town of Bethlehem,
    How still we see thee lie!
  Above thy deep and dreamless sleep
    The silent stars go by;
  Yet in thy dark streets shineth
    The everlasting Light;
  The hopes and fears of all the years
    Are met in thee to-night.

  For Christ is born of Mary,
    And, gathered all above.
  While mortals sleep, the angels keep
    Their watch of wondering love.
  O morning stars, together
    Proclaim the holy birth!
  And praises sing to God the King,
    And peace to men on earth.

  How silently, how silently,
    The wondrous gift is given!
  So God imparts to human hearts
    The blessings of His heaven.
  No ear may hear His coming,
    But in this world of sin,
  Where meek souls will receive Him still,
    The dear Christ enters in.

  O holy Child of Bethlehem!
    Descend to us, we pray;
  Cast out our sin, and enter in,
    Be born in us to-day.
  We hear the Christmas angels
    The great glad tidings tell;
  Oh come to us, abide with us,
    Our Lord Emmanuel!

PHILLIPS BROOKS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE ANGELS' SONG.


  It came upon the midnight clear,
    That glorious song of old,
  From angels bending near the earth
    To touch their harps of gold:
  "Peace to the earth, good-will to men
    From heaven's all-gracious King!"
  The world in solemn stillness lay
    To hear the angels sing.

  Still through the cloven skies they come,
    With peaceful wings unfurled;
  And still their heavenly music floats
    O'er all the weary world:
  Above its sad and lowly plains
    They bend on heavenly wing,
  And ever o'er its Babel sounds
    The blessèd angels sing.

  Yet with the woes of sin and strife
    The world has suffered long;
  Beneath the angel-strain have rolled
    Two thousand years of wrong;
  And man, at war with man, hears not
    The love-song which they bring:
  O, hush the noise, ye men of strife,
    And hear the angels sing!

  And ye, beneath life's crushing load
    Whose forms are bending low;
  Who toil along the climbing way
    With painful steps and slow,--
  Look now! for glad and golden hours
    Come swiftly on the wing;
  O, rest beside the weary road,
    And hear the angels sing.

  For lo! the days are hastening on,
    By prophet-bards foretold,
  When with the ever-circling years
    Comes round the age of gold;
  When Peace shall over all the earth
    Its ancient splendors fling,
  And the whole world send back the song
    Which now the angels sing.

EDMUND HAMILTON SEARS.


       *       *       *       *       *

EPIPHANY.

     "We have seen his star in the east."
     --MATTHEW ii. 2.


  Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
    Dawn on our darkness, and lend us thine aid;
  Star of the East, the horizon adorning,
    Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

  Cold on his cradle the dew-drops are shining,
    Low lies his head with the beasts of the stall;
  Angels adore him in slumber reclining,
    Maker and Monarch and Saviour of all.

  Say, shall we yield him, in costly devotion,
    Odors of Edom, and offerings divine?
  Gems of the mountain, and pearls of the ocean,
    Myrrh from the forest, or gold from the mine?

  Vainly we offer each ample oblation,
    Vainly with gifts would his favor secure;
  Richer by far is the heart's adoration,
    Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.

  Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,
    Dawn on our darkness, and lend us thine aid:
  Star of the East, the horizon adorning,
    Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

REGINALD HEBER.


       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE MORNING OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY.


  This is the month, and this the happy morn,
    Wherein the Son of heaven's eternal king,
  Of wedded maid and virgin mother born,
    Our great redemption from above did bring--
    For so the holy sages once did sing--
  That He our deadly forfeit should release,
  And with His Father work us a perpetual peace.

  That glorious form, that light unsufferable,
    And that far-beaming blaze of majesty
  Wherewith He wont at heaven's high council-table
    To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
    He laid aside; and here with us to be,
  Forsook the courts of everlasting day,
  And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay.

  Say, heavenly muse, shall not thy sacred vein
    Afford a present to the infant God?
  Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain,
    To welcome Him to this His new abode--
    Now while the heaven, by the sun's team untrod,
  Hath took no print of the approaching light,
  And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?

  See how from far upon the eastern road
    The star-led wizards haste with odors sweet!
  Oh! run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
    And lay it lowly at His blessed feet;
    Have thou the honor first thy Lord to greet,
  And join thy voice unto the angel choir,
  From out His secret altar touched with hallowed fire.


  THE HYMN.

    It was the winter wild
    While the heaven-born child
  All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies--
    Nature, in awe to Him,
    Had doffed her gaudy trim,
  With her great Master so to sympathize;
  It was no season then for her
  To wanton with the sun, her lusty paramour.

    Only with speeches fair
    She woos the gentle air
  To hide her guilty front with innocent snow,
    And on her naked shame.
    Pollute with sinful blame,
  The saintly veil of maiden white to throw--
  Confounded that her maker's eyes
  Should look so near upon her foul deformities.

    But He, her fears to cease,
    Sent down the meek-eyed Peace;
  She, crowned with olive green, came softly sliding
    Down through the turning sphere,
    His ready harbinger,
  With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing;
  And waving wide her myrtle wand,
  She strikes a universal peace through sea and land.

    Nor war, or battle's sound,
    Was heard the world around--
  The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
    The hookèd chariot stood
    Unstained with hostile blood;
  The trumpet spake not to the armed throng;
  And kings sat still with awful eye,
  As if they surely knew their sovereign Lord was by.

    But peaceful was the night
    Wherein the prince of light
  His reign of peace upon the earth began;
    The winds, with wonder whist,
    Smoothly the waters kissed,
  Whispering new joys to the mild ocean,
  Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
  While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.

    The stars with deep amaze
    Stand fixed in steadfast gaze,
  Bending one way their precious influence;
    And will not take their flight
    For all the morning light,
  Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
  But in their glimmering orbs did glow
  Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.

    And though the shady gloom
    Had given day her room,
  The sun himself withheld his wonted speed,
    And hid his head for shame,
    As his inferior flame
  The new-enlightened world no more should need;
  He saw a greater sun appear
  Than his bright throne or burning axle-tree could bear.

    The shepherds on the lawn,
    Or e'er the point of dawn,
  Sat simply chatting in a rustic row;
    Full little thought they then
    That the mighty Pan
  Was kindly come to live with them below;
  Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,
  Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.

    When such music sweet
    Their hearts and ears did greet
  As never was by mortal finger strook--
    Divinely-warbled voice
    Answering the stringed noise,
  As all their souls in blissful rapture took;
  The air, such pleasure loath to lose,
  With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.

    Nature, that heard such sound
    Beneath the hollow round
  Of Cynthia's seat the airy region thrilling,
    Now was almost won
    To think her part was done.
  And that her reign had here its last fulfilling;
  She knew such harmony alone
  Could hold all heaven and earth in happier union.

    At last surrounds their sight
    A globe of circular light,
  That with long beams the shamefaced night arrayed;
    The helmèd cherubim
    And sworded seraphim
  Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displayed,
  Harping in loud and solemn choir,
  With unexpressive notes, to heaven's new-born heir--

    Such music as ('tis said)
    Before was never made,
  But when of old the sons of morning sung,
    While the Creator great
    His constellations set,
  And the well-balanced world on hinges hung,
  And cast the dark foundations deep,
  And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep.

    Ring out, ye crystal spheres!
    Once bless our human ears,
  If ye have power to touch our senses so;
    And let your silver chime
    Move in melodious time,
  And let the bass of heaven's deep organ blow;
  And with your ninefold harmony
  Make up full consort to the angelic symphony.

    For if such holy song
    Inwrap our fancy long,
  Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold;
    And speckled vanity
    Will sicken soon and die,
  And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould;
  And hell itself will pass away.
  And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.

    Yea, truth and justice then
    Will down return to men,
  Orbed in a rainbow; and, like glories wearing,
    Mercy will sit between,
    Throned in celestial sheen,
  With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering;
  And heaven, as at some festival,
  Will open wide the gates of her high palace hall.

    But wisest fate says No--
    This must not yet be so;
  The babe yet lies in smiling infancy
    That on the bitter cross
    Must redeem our loss.
  So both Himself and us to glorify.
  Yet first to those ye chained in sleep
  The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep,

    With such a horrid clang
    As on Mount Sinai rang,
  While the red fire and smould'ring clouds out-brake;
    The aged earth, aghast
    With terror of that blast,
  Shall from the surface to the centre shake--
  When, at the world's last session,
  The dreadful judge in middle air shall spread his throne.

    And then at last our bliss
    Full and perfect is--
  But now begins: for from this happy day
    The old dragon, under ground
    In straiter limits bound,
  Not half so far casts his usurpèd sway,
  And, wroth to see his kingdom fail,
  Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.

    The oracles are dumb:
    No voice or hideous hum
  Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving;
    Apollo from his shrine
    Can no more divine,
  With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving;
  No nightly trance, or breathèd spell,
  Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell.

    The lonely mountains o'er,
    And the resounding shore,
  A voice of weeping heard and loud lament;
    From haunted spring, and dale
    Edged with poplar pale,
  The parting genius is with sighing sent;
  With flower-inwoven tresses torn
  The nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.

    In consecrated earth,
    And on the holy hearth,
  The lares and lemures moan with midnight plaint;
    In urns and altars round
    A drear and dying sound
  Affrights the flamens at their service quaint;
  And the chill marble seems to sweat,
  While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.

    Peor and Baälim
    Forsake their temples dim,
  With that twice-battered god of Palestine;
    And moonèd Ashtaroth,
    Heaven's queen and mother both.
  Now sits not girt with tapers' holy shine;
  The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn--
  In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.

    And sullen Moloch fled,
    Hath left in shadows dread
  His burning idol all of blackest hue;
    In vain, with cymbal's ring,
    They call the grisly king,
  In dismal dance about the furnace blue;
  The brutish gods of Nile as fast--
  Isis and Orus, and the dog Anubis--haste.

    Nor is Osiris seen
    In Memphian grove or green,
  Trampling the unshowered grass with lowings loud,
    Nor can he be at rest
    Within his sacred chest--
  Naught but profoundest hell can be his shroud;
  In vain, with timbrelled anthems dark.
  The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark.

    He feels from Juda's land
    The dreaded infant's hand--
  The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyne;
    Nor all the gods beside
    Longer dare abide--
  Not Typhon huge, ending in snaky twine;
  Our babe, to show His God-head true,
  Can in His swaddling-bands control the damnèd crew.

    So, when the sun in bed,
    Curtained with cloudy red,
  Pillows his chin upon an orient wave,
    The flocking shadows pale
    Troop to the infernal jail--
  Each fettered ghost slips to his several grave;
  And the yellow-skirted fays
  Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.

    But see the virgin blest
    Hath laid her babe to rest--
  Time is our tedious song should here have ending;
    Heaven's youngest teemèd star
    Hath fixed her polished car,
  Her sleeping Lord with handmaid lamp attending;
  And all about the courtly stable
  Bright-harnessed angels sit in order serviceable.

MILTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

A CHRISTMAS HYMN.


  It was the calm and silent night!
    Seven hundred years and fifty-three
  Had Rome been growing up to might,
    And now was queen of land and sea.
  No sound was heard of clashing wars;
    Peace brooded o'er the hushed domain:
  Apollo, Pallas, Jove, and Mars
    Held undisturbed their ancient reign,
        In the solemn midnight,
          Centuries ago.

  'Twas in the calm and silent night!
    The senator of haughty Rome,
  Impatient, urged his chariot's flight,
    From lordly revel rolling home;
  Triumphal arches, gleaming, swell
    His breast with thoughts of boundless sway;
  What recked the Roman what befell
    A paltry province far away,
        In the solemn midnight,
          Centuries ago?

  Within that province far away
    Went plodding home a weary boor;
  A streak of light before him lay,
    Fallen through a half-shut stable-door
  Across his path. He passed--for naught
    Told what was going on within;
  How keen the stars, his only thought;
    The air how calm and cold and thin,
        In the solemn midnight,
          Centuries ago!

  Oh, strange indifference! low and high
    Drowsed over common joys and cares;
  The earth was still--but knew not why;
    The world was listening, unawares.
  How calm a moment may precede
    One that shall thrill the world forever!
  To that still moment none would heed,
    Man's doom was linked no more to sever--
        In the solemn midnight,
          Centuries ago!

  It is the calm and solemn night!
    A thousand bells ring out, and throw
  Their joyous peals abroad, and smite
    The darkness--charmed and holy now!
  The night that erst no name had worn,
    To it a happy name is given;
  For in that stable lay new-born,
    The peaceful Prince of Earth and Heaven,
        In the solemn midnight,
          Centuries ago!

ALFRED DOMETT.


       *       *       *       *       *

TRYSTE NOËL.


  The Ox he openeth wide the Doore
    And from the Snowe he calls her inne,
  And he hath seen her smile therefore,
    Our Ladye without Sinne.
      Now soone from Sleepe
      A Starre shall leap,
  And soone arrive both King and Hinde;
          _Amen, Amen_:
  But oh, the place co'd I but finde!

  The Ox hath husht his voyce and bent
    Trewe eyes of Pitty ore the Mow,
  And on his lovelie Neck, forspent,
    The Blessed lays her Browe.
      Around her feet
      Full Warme and Sweete
  His bowerie Breath doth meeklie dwell;
          _Amen, Amen_:
  But sore am I with Vaine Travèl!

  The Ox is host in Juda's stall,
    And Host of more than onelie one.
  For close she gathereth withal
    Our Lorde her littel Sonne.
      Glad Hinde and King
      Their Gyfte may bring,
  But wo'd to-night my Teares were there,
          _Amen, Amen_:
  Between her Bosom and His hayre!

LOUISE IMOGEN GUINEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT.

    A BALLAD.


  There's a legend that's told of a gypsy who dwelt
    In the lands where the pyramids be;
  And her robe was embroidered with stars, and her belt
    With devices right wondrous to see;
  And she lived in the days when our Lord was a child
    On his mother's immaculate breast;
  When he fled from his foes,--when to Egypt exiled,
    He went down with Saint Joseph the blest.

  This Egyptian held converse with magic, methinks,
    And the future was given to her gaze;
  For an obelisk marked her abode, and a sphinx
    On her threshold kept vigil always.
  She was pensive and ever alone, nor was seen
    In the haunts of the dissolute crowd;
  But communed with the ghosts of the Pharaohs, I ween,
    Or with visitors wrapped in a shroud.

  And there came an old man from the desert one day,
    With a maid on a mule by that road;
  And a child on her bosom reclined, and the way
    Let them straight to the gypsy's abode;
  And they seemed to have travelled a wearisome path,
    From thence many, many a league,--
  From a tyrant's pursuit, from an enemy's wrath,
    Spent with toil and o'ercome with fatigue.

  And the gypsy came forth from her dwelling, and prayed
    That the pilgrims would rest them awhile;
  And she offered her couch to that delicate maid,
    Who had come many, many a mile.
  And she fondled the babe with affection's caress,
    And she begged the old man would repose;
  "Here the stranger," she said, "ever finds free access,
    And the wanderer balm for his woes."

  Then her guests from the glare of the noonday she led
    To a seat in her grotto so cool;
  Where she spread them a banquet of fruits, and a shed,
    With a manger, was found for the mule;
  With the wine of the palm-tree, with dates newly culled,
    All the toil of the day she beguiled;
  And with song in a language mysterious she lulled
    On her bosom the wayfaring child.

  When the gypsy anon in her Ethiop hand
    Took the infant's diminutive palm,
  O, 'twas fearful to see how the features she scanned
    Of the babe in his slumbers so calm!
  Well she noted each mark and each furrow that crossed
    O'er the tracings of destiny's line:
  "WHENCE CAME YE?" she cried, in astonishment lost,
    "FOR THIS CHILD IS OF LINEAGE DIVINE!"

  "From the village of Nazareth," Joseph replied,
    "Where we dwelt in the land of the Jew,
  We have fled from a tyrant whose garment is dyed
    In the gore of the children he slew:
  We were told to remain till an angel's command
    Should appoint us the hour to return;
  But till then we inhabit the foreigners' land,
    And in Egypt we make our sojourn."

  "Then ye tarry with me," cried the gypsy in joy,
    "And ye make of my dwelling your home;
  Many years have I prayed that the Israelite boy
    (Blessèd hope of the Gentiles!) would come."
  And she kissed both the feet of the infant and knelt,
    And adored him at once; then a smile
  Lit the face of his mother, who cheerfully dwelt
    With her host on the bank of the Nile.

FRANCIS MAHONY (_Father Prout_).


       *       *       *       *       *

CANA.


  Dear Friend! whose presence in the house,
    Whose gracious word benign,
  Could once, at Cana's wedding feast,
    Change water into wine;

  Come, visit us! and when dull work
    Grows weary, line on line,
  Revive our souls, and let us see
    Life's water turned to wine.

  Gay mirth shall deepen into joy,
    Earth's hopes grow half divine,
  When Jesus visits us, to make
    Life's water glow as wine.

  The social talk, the evening fire,
    The homely household shrine,
  Grow bright with angel visits, when
    The Lord pours out the wine.

  For when self-seeking turns to love,
    Not knowing mine nor thine,
  The miracle again is wrought,
    And water turned to wine.
JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOST SHEEP.

    ("THE NINETY AND NINE.")


  There were ninety and nine that safely lay
    In the shelter of the fold;
  But one was out on the hills away,
    Far off from the gates of gold,
  Away on the mountain wild and bare,
  Away from the tender Shepherd's care.

  "Lord, thou hast here thy ninety and nine:
    Are they not enough for thee?"
  But the Shepherd made answer: "'T is of mine
    Has wandered away from me;
  And although the road be rough and steep
  I go to the desert to find my sheep."

  But none of the ransomed ever knew
    How deep were the waters crossed,
  Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through
    Ere he found his sheep that was lost.
  Out in the desert he heard its cry--
  Sick and helpless, and ready to die.

  "Lord, whence are those blood-drops all the way,
    That mark out the mountain track?"
  "They were shed for one who had gone astray
    Ere the Shepherd could bring him back."
  "Lord, whence are thy hands so rent and torn?"
  "They are piercèd to-night by many a thorn."

  But all through the mountains, thunder-riven,
    And up from the rocky steep,
  There rose a cry to the gate of heaven,
    "Rejoice! I have found my sheep!"
  And the angels echoed around the throne,
  "Rejoice, for the Lord brings back his own!"

ELIZABETH CECILIA CLEPHANE.


       *       *       *       *       *

DE SHEEPFOL'.


  De massa ob de sheepfol',
  Dat guards de sheepfol' bin,
  Look out in de gloomerin' meadows,
  Wha'r de long night rain begin--
  So he call to de hirelin' shepa'd,
  "Is my sheep, is dey all come in?"
  Oh den, says de hirelin' shepa'd:
  "Dey's some, dey's black and thin,
  And some, dey's po' ol' wedda's;
  But de res', dey's all brung in.
  But de res', dey's all brung in."

  Den de massa ob de sheepfol',
  Dat guards de sheepfol' bin,
  Goes down in the gloomerin' meadows,
  Wha'r de long night rain begin--
  So he le' down de ba's ob de sheepfol',
  Callin' sof', "Come in. Come in."
  Callin' sof', "Come in. Come in."

  Den up t'ro' de gloomerin' meadows,
  T'ro' de col' night rain and win',
  And up t'ro' de gloomerin' rain-paf',
  Wha'r de sleet fa' pie'cin' thin,
  De po' los' sheep ob de sheepfol',
  Dey all comes gadderin' in.
  De po' los' sheep ob de sheepfol',
  Dey all comes gadderin' in.

SARAH PRATT M'LEAN GREENE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE GOOD SHEPHERD WITH THE KID.


  _He saves the sheep, the goats he doth not save._
  So rang Tertullian's sentence, on the side
  Of that unpitying Phrygian Sect which cried:
  "Him can no fount of fresh forgiveness lave,

  Who sins, once washed by the baptismal wave."--
  So spake the fierce Tertullian. But she sighed,
  The infant Church! of love she felt the tide
  Stream on her from her Lord's yet recent grave.

  And then she smiled; and in the Catacombs,
  With eye suffused but heart inspired true,
  On those walls subterranean, where she hid

  Her head in ignominy, death, and tombs,
  She her good Shepherd's hasty image drew--
  And on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.

MATTHEW ARNOLD.


       *       *       *       *       *

TWO SAYINGS.


  Two sayings of the Holy Scriptures beat
  Like pulses in the Church's brow and breast;
  And by them we find rest in our unrest,
  And heart-deep in salt tears, do yet entreat
  God's fellowship, as if on heavenly seat.
  The first is _Jesus wept_, whereon is prest
  Full many a sobbing face that drops its best
  And sweetest waters on the record sweet:
  And one is, where the Christ denied and scorned
  _Looked upon Peter_. Oh, to render plain,
  By help of having loved a little and mourned,
  That look of sovran love and sovran pain
  Which he who could not sin yet suffered, turned
  On him who could reject but not sustain!

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

A BALLAD OF TREES AND THE MASTER.


  Into the woods my Master went,
  Clean forspent, forspent.
  Into the woods my Master came,
  Forspent with love and shame.
  But the olives they were not blind to Him;
  The little gray leaves were kind to Him;
  The thorn-tree had a mind to Him
  When into the woods He came.

  Out of the woods my Master went,
  And He was well content.
  Out of the woods my Master came,
  Content with death and shame.
  When Death and Shame would woo Him last,
  From under the trees they drew Him last:
  'Twas on a tree they slew Him--last,
  When out of the woods He came.

SIDNEY LANIER.


       *       *       *       *       *

STABAT MATER DOLOROSA.


  Stood the afflicted mother weeping,
  Near the cross her station keeping
    Whereon hung her Son and Lord;
  Through whose spirit sympathizing,
  Sorrowing and agonizing,
    Also passed the cruel sword.

  Oh! how mournful and distressèd
  Was that favored and most blessèd
    Mother of the only Son,
  Trembling, grieving, bosom heaving,
  While perceiving, scarce believing,
    Pains of that Illustrious One!

  Who the man, who, called a brother.
  Would not weep, saw he Christ's mother
    In such deep distress and wild?
  Who could not sad tribute render
  Witnessing that mother tender
    Agonizing with her child?

  For his people's sins atoning,
  Him she saw in torments groaning,
    Given to the scourger's rod;
  Saw her darling offspring dying,
  Desolate, forsaken, crying.
    Yield his spirit up to God.

  Make me feel thy sorrow's power,
  That with thee I tears may shower,
    Tender mother, fount of love!
  Make my heart with love unceasing
  Burn toward Christ the Lord, that pleasing
    I may be to him above.

  Holy mother, this be granted,
  That the slain one's wounds be planted
    Firmly in my heart to bide.
  Of him wounded, all astounded--
  Depths unbounded for me sounded--
    All the pangs with me divide.

  Make me weep with thee in union;
  With the Crucified, communion
    In his grief and suffering give;
  Near the cross, with tears unfailing,
  I would join thee in thy wailing
    Here as long as I shall live.

  Maid of maidens, all excelling!
  Be not bitter, me repelling;
    Make thou me a mourner too;
  Make me bear about Christ's dying,
  Share his passion, shame defying;
    All his wounds in me renew.

  Wound for wound be there created;
  With the cross intoxicated
    For thy Son's dear sake, I pray--
  May I, fired with pure affection,
  Virgin, have through thee protection
    In the solemn Judgment Day.

  Let me by the cross be warded,
  By the death of Christ be guarded,
    Nourished by divine supplies.
  When the body death hath riven,
  Grant that to the soul be given
    Glories bright of Paradise.

From the Latin of FRA JACOPONE.

Translation of ABRAHAM COLES.


       *       *       *       *       *

MYRRH-BEARERS.[A]


  Three women crept at break of day
  A-grope along the shadowy way
  Where Joseph's tomb and garden lay.

  With blanch of woe each face was white,
  As the gray Orient's waxing light
  Brought back upon their awe-struck sight

  The sixth-day scene of anguish. Fast
  The starkly standing cross they passed,
  And, breathless, neared the gate at last.

  Each on her throbbing bosom bore
  A burden of such fragrant store
  As never there had lain before.

  Spices, the purest, richest, best,
  That e'er the musky East possessed,
  From Ind to Araby-the-Blest,

  Had they with sorrow-riven hearts
  Searched all Jerusalem's costliest marts
  In quest of,--nards whose pungent arts

  Should the dead sepulchre imbue
  With vital odors through and through:
  'T was all their love had leave to do!

  Christ did not need their gifts; and yet
  Did either Mary once regret
  Her offering? Did Salome fret

  Over the unused aloes? Nay!
  They counted not as waste, that day,
  What they had brought their Lord. The way

  Home seemed the path to heaven. They bare,
  Thenceforth, about the robes they ware
  The clinging perfume everywhere.

  So, ministering as erst did these,
  Go women forth by twos and threes
  (Unmindful of their morning ease),

  Through tragic darkness, murk and dim,
  Where'er they see the faintest rim,
  Of promise,--all for sake of him

  Who rose from Joseph's tomb. They hold
  It just such joy as those of old,
  To tell the tale the Marys told.

  Myrrh-bearers still,--at home, abroad,
  What paths have holy women trod,
  Burdened with votive gifts for God,--

  Rare gifts whose chiefest worth was priced
  By this one thought, that all sufficed:
  Their spices had been bruised for Christ!

MARGARET JUNKIN PRESTON.

[Footnote A: _Myrophores_, a name given to the Marys, in Greek
Christian art.]


       *       *       *       *       *

LITANY.


  Saviour, when in dust to Thee
  Low we bend the adoring knee;
  When, repentant, to the skies
  Scarce we lift our weeping eyes,--
  O, by all Thy pains and woe
  Suffered once for man below,
  Bending from Thy throne on high,
  Hear our solemn litany!

  By Thy helpless infant years;
  By Thy life of want and tears;
  By Thy days of sore distress
  In the savage wilderness;
  By the dread mysterious hour
  Of the insulting tempter's power,--
  Turn, O, turn a favoring eye,
  Hear our solemn litany!

  By the sacred griefs that wept
  O'er the grave where Lazarus slept;
  By the boding tears that flowed
  Over Salem's loved abode;
  By the anguished sigh that told
  Treachery lurked within Thy fold,--
  From Thy seat above the sky
  Hear our solemn litany!

  By Thine hour of dire despair;
  By Thine agony of prayer;
  By the cross, the nail, the thorn,
  Piercing spear, and torturing scorn;
  By the gloom that veiled the skies
  O'er the dreadful sacrifice,--
  Listen to our humble cry,
  Hear our solemn litany!

  By Thy deep expiring groan;
  By the sad sepulchral stone;
  By the vault whose dark abode
  Held in vain the rising God;
  O, from earth to heaven restored,
  Mighty, reascended Lord,--
  Listen, listen to the cry
  Of our solemn litany!

SIR ROBERT GRANT.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHRIST.


  He might have reared a palace at a word,
  Who sometimes had not where to lay His head.
  Time was when He who nourished crowds with bread,
  Would not one meal unto Himself afford.
  He healed another's scratch, His own side bled;
  Side, hands and feet with cruel piercings gored.
  Twelve legions girded with angelic sword
  Stood at His beck, the scorned and buffeted.
  Oh, wonderful the wonders left undone!
  Yet not more wonderful than those He wrought!
  Oh, self-restraint, surpassing human thought!
  To have all power, yet be as having none!
  Oh, self-denying love, that thought alone
  For needs of others, never for its own!

RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH.


       *       *       *       *       *

ABIDE WITH ME.


  Abide with me! Fast falls the eventide;
  The darkness deepens: Lord, with me abide!
  When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
  Help of the helpless, O abide with me!

  Swift to its close ebbs out life's little day;
  Earth's joys grow dim; its glories pass away:
  Change and decay in all around I see;
  O thou, who changest not, abide with me!

  Not a brief glance I beg, a passing word.
  But as thou dwelt with thy disciples, Lord,
  Familiar, condescending, patient, free,--
  Come, not to sojourn, but abide, with me!

  Come not in terrors, as the King of kings;
  But kind and good, with healing in thy wings:
  Tears for all woes, a heart for every plea;
  Come, Friend of sinners, and thus bide with me!

  Thou on my head in early youth didst smile,
  And, though rebellious and perverse meanwhile,
  Thou hast not left me, oft as I left thee:
  On to the close, O Lord, abide with me!

  I need thy presence every passing hour.
  What but thy grace can foil the Tempter's power?
  Who like thyself my guide and stay can be?
  Through cloud and sunshine, O abide with me!

  I fear no foe with thee at hand to bless:
  Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
  Where is death's sting, where, grave, thy victory?
  I triumph still, if thou abide with me.

  Hold thou thy cross before my closing eyes;
  Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
  Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee:
  In life and death, O Lord, abide with me!

HENRY FRANCIS LYTE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE DISCIPLES AFTER THE ASCENSION.


  He is gone! beyond the skies,
  A cloud receives him from our eyes:
  Gone beyond the highest height
  Of mortal gaze or angel's flight:
  Through the veils of time and space,
  Passed into the holiest place:
  All the toil, the sorrow done,
  All the battle fought and won.

  He is gone; and we return,
  And our hearts within us burn;
  Olivet no more shall greet
  With welcome shout his coming feet:
  Never shall we track him more
  On Gennesareth's glistening shore:
  Never in that look or voice
  Shall Zion's walls again rejoice.

  He is gone; and we remain
  In this world of sin and pain:
  In the void which he has left,
  On this earth of him bereft,
  We have still his work to do,
  We can still his path pursue:
  Seek him both in friend and foe,
  In ourselves his image show.

  He is gone; we heard him say,
  "Good that I should go away";
  Gone is that dear form and face,
  But not gone his present grace;
  Though himself no more we see,
  Comfortless we cannot be;
  No! his Spirit still is ours,
  Quickening, freshening all our powers.

  He is gone; towards their goal
  World and church must onward roll;
  Far behind we leave the past,
  Forward are our glances cast;
  Still his words before us range
  Through the ages, as they change:
  Wheresoe'er the truth shall lead,
  He will give whate'er we need.

  He is gone; but we once more
  Shall behold him as before,
  In the heaven of heavens the same
  As on earth he went and came.
  In the many mansions there
  Place for us he will prepare:
  In that world, unseen, unknown,
  He and we may yet be one.

  He is gone; but not in vain,--
  Wait until he comes again:
  He is risen, he is not here;
  Far above this earthly sphere:
  Evermore in heart and mind,
  Where our peace in him we find,
  To our own eternal Friend,
  Thitherward let us ascend.

ARTHUR PENRHYN STANLEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

WRESTLING JACOB.


  FIRST PART.

  Come, O thou Traveller unknown,
    Whom still I hold, but cannot see;
  My company before is gone,
    And I am left alone with thee;
  With thee all night I mean to stay,
  And wrestle till the break of day.

  I need not tell thee who I am;
    My sin and misery declare;
  Thyself hast called me by my name;
    Look on thy hands, and read it there;
  But who, I ask thee, who art thou?
  Tell me thy name, and tell me now.

  In vain thou strugglest to get free;
    I never will unloose my hold:
  Art thou the Man that died for me?
    The secret of thy love unfold;
  Wrestling, I will not let thee go
  Till I thy name, thy nature know.

  Wilt thou not yet to me reveal
    Thy new, unutterable name?
  Tell me, I still beseech thee, tell;
    To know it now resolved I am;
  Wrestling, I will not let thee go
  Till I thy name, thy nature know.

  What though my shrinking flesh complain
    And murmur to contend so long?
  I rise superior to my pain;
    When I am weak, then am I strong!
  And when my all of strength shall fail,
  I shall with the God-man prevail.


  SECOND PART.

  Yield to me now, for I am weak,
    But confident in self-despair;
  Speak to my heart, in blessings speak;
    Be conquered by my instant prayer;
  Speak, or thou never hence shalt move,
  And tell me if thy name be Love.

  'T is Love! 't is Love! Thou diedst for me;
    I hear thy whisper in my heart;
  The morning breaks, the shadows flee;
    Pure, universal Love thou art;
  To me, to all, thy bowels move;
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

  My prayer hath power with God; the grace
    Unspeakable I now receive;
  Through faith I see thee face to face;
    I see thee face to face and live!
  In vain I have not wept and strove;
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

  I know thee, Saviour, who thou art,
    Jesus, the feeble sinner's friend;
  Nor wilt thou with the night depart,
    But stay and love me to the end;
  Thy mercies never shall remove;
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

  The Sun of Righteousness on me
    Hath risen, with healing in his wings;
  Withered my nature's strength; from thee
    My soul its life and succor brings;
  My help is all laid up above;
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

  Contented now upon my thigh
    I halt till life's short journey end;
  All helplessness, all weakness, I
    On thee alone for strength depend;
  Nor have I power from thee to move;
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

  Lame as I am, I take the prey;
    Hell, earth, and sin with ease o'ercome;
  I leap for joy, pursue my way,
    And, as a bounding hart, fly home;
  Through all eternity to prove
  Thy nature and thy name is Love.

CHARLES WESLEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CONVERSION OF SAINT PAUL.


  The midday sun, with fiercest glare,
  Broods over the hazy, twinkling air;
    Along the level sand
  The palm-tree's shade unwavering lies,
  Just as thy towers, Damascus, rise
    To greet yon wearied band.

  The leader of that martial crew
  Seems bent some mighty deed to do,
    So steadily he speeds,
  With lips firm closed and fixed eye,
  Like warrior when the fight is nigh,
    Nor talk nor landscape heeds.

  What sudden blaze is round him poured,
  As though all Heaven's refulgent hoard
    In one rich glory shone?
  One moment,--and to earth he falls:
  What voice his inmost heart appalls?--
    Voice heard by him alone.

  For to the rest both words and form
  Seem lost in lightning and in storm,
    While Saul, in wakeful trance,
  Sees deep within that dazzling field
  His persecuted Lord revealed
    With keen yet pitying glance:

  And hears the meek upbraiding call
  As gently on his spirit fall,
    As if the Almighty Son
  Were prisoner yet in this dark earth,
  Nor had proclaimed his royal birth,
    Nor his great power begun.

  "Ah! wherefore persecut'st thou me?"
  He heard and saw, and sought to free
    His strained eye from the sight:
  But Heaven's high magic bound it there,
  Still gazing, though untaught to bear
    The insufferable light.

  "Who art thou, Lord?" he falters forth:--
  So shall Sin ask of heaven and earth
    At the last awful day
  "When did we see thee suffering nigh,
  And passed thee with unheeding eye?
    Great God of judgment, say!"

  Ah! little dream our listless eyes
  What glorious presence they despise
    While, in our noon of life,
  To power or fame we rudely press.--
  Christ is at hand, to scorn or bless,
    Christ suffers in our strife.

  And though heaven's gates long since have closed,
  And our dear Lord in bliss reposed,
    High above mortal ken,
  To every ear in every land
  (Though meek ears only understand)
    He speaks as he did then.

  "Ah! wherefore persecute ye me?
  'T is hard, ye so in love should be
    With your own endless woe.
  Know, though at God's right hand I live,
  I feel each wound ye reckless give
    To the least saint below.

  "I in your care my brethren left,
  Not willing ye should be bereft
    Of waiting on your Lord.
  The meanest offering ye can make--
  A drop of water--for love's sake,
    In heaven, be sure, is stored."

  Oh, by those gentle tones and dear,
  When thou hast stayed our wild career,
    Thou only hope of souls,
  Ne'er let us cast one look behind,
  But in the thought of Jesus find
    What every thought controls.

  As to thy last Apostle's heart
  Thy lightning glance did then impart
    Zeal's never-dying fire,
  So teach us on thy shrine to lay
  Our hearts, and let them day by day
    Intenser blaze and higher.

  And as each mild and winning note
  (Like pulses that round harp-strings float
    When the full strain is o'er)
  Left lingering on his inward ear
  Music, that taught, as death drew near,
    Love's lesson more and more:

  So, as we walk our earthly round,
  Still may the echo of that sound
    Be in our memory stored:
  "Christians, behold your happy state;
  Christ is in these who round you wait;
    Make much of your dear Lord!"

JOHN KEBLE.


       *       *       *       *       *

"ROCK OF AGES."

    "Such hymns are never forgotten. They cling to us through our
    whole life. We carry them with us upon our journey. We sing
    them in the forest. The workman follows the plough with sacred
    songs. Children catch them, and singing only for the joy it
    gives them now, are yet laying up for all their life food of
    the sweetest joy."--HENRY WARD BEECHER.


  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,"
    Thoughtlessly the maiden sung.
  Fell the words unconsciously
    From her girlish, gleeful tongue;
  Sang as little children sing;
    Sang as sing the birds in June;
  Fell the words like light leaves down
    On the current of the tune,--
  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee."

  "Let me hide myself in Thee:"
    Felt her soul no need to hide,--
  Sweet the song as song could be,
    And she had no thought beside;
  All the words unheedingly
    Fell from lips untouched by care,
  Dreaming not that they might be
    On some other lips a prayer,--
  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee."

  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,"
    'T was a woman sung them now,
  Pleadingly and prayerfully;
    Every word her heart did know.
  Rose the song as storm-tossed bird
    Beats with weary wing the air,
  Every note with sorrow stirred,
    Every syllable a prayer,--
  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee."

  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,"--
    Lips grown agèd sung the hymn
  Trustingly and tenderly,
    Voice grown weak and eyes grown dim,--
  "Let me hide myself in Thee."
    Trembling though the voice and low,
  Rose the sweet strain peacefully
    Like a river in its flow;
  Sung as only they can sing
    Who life's thorny path have passed;
  Sung as only they can sing
    Who behold the promised rest,--
  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee."

  "Rock of Ages, cleft for me,"
    Sung above a coffin lid;
  Underneath, all restfully,
    All life's joys and sorrows hid.
  Nevermore, O storm-tossed soul!
    Nevermore from wind or tide,
  Nevermore from billow's roll,
    Wilt thou need thyself to hide.
  Could the sightless, sunken eyes,
    Closed beneath the soft gray hair,
  Could the mute and stiffened lips
    Move again in pleading prayer,
  Still, aye still, the words would be,--
    "Let me hide myself in Thee."

EDWARD H. RICH.


       *       *       *       *       *

ART THOU WEARY?


  Art thou weary, art thou languid,
    Art thou sore distressed?
  "Come to Me," saith One, "and coming,
    Be at rest."

  Hath He marks to lead me to Him,
    If He be my Guide?
  "In His feet and hands are wound-prints,
    And His side."

  Is there diadem, as Monarch,
    That His brow adorns?
  "Yea, a crown, in very surety,
    But of thorns."

  If I find Him, if I follow,
    What His guerdon here?
  "Many a sorrow, many a labor,
    Many a tear."

  If I still hold closely to Him,
    What hath He at last?
  "Sorrow vanquished, labor ended,
    Jordan passed."

  If I ask Him to receive me,
    Will He say me nay?
  "Not till earth, and not till heaven
    Pass away."

  Finding, following, keeping, struggling,
    Is He sure to bless?
  "Saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs,
    Answer, Yes."

From the Latin of SAINT STEPHEN THE SABAITE.

Translation of JOHN MASON NEALE.


       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN GATHERING CLOUDS AROUND I VIEW.


  When gathering clouds around I view,
  And days are dark, and friends are few,
  On Him I lean, who, not in vain,
  Experienced every human pain;
  He sees my wants, allays my fears.
  And counts and treasures up my tears.
  If aught should tempt my soul to stray
  From heavenly wisdom's narrow way,
  To fly the good I would pursue,
  Or do the sin I would not do,--
  Still He who felt temptation's power
  Shall guard me in that dangerous hour.

  If wounded love my bosom swell,
  Deceived by those I prized too well,
  He shall His pitying aid bestow
  Who felt on earth severer woe,
  At once betrayed, denied, or fled,
  By those who shared His daily bread.

  If vexing thoughts within me rise,
  And sore dismayed my spirit dies,
  Still He who once vouchsafed to bear
  The sickening anguish of despair
  Shall sweetly soothe, shall gently dry,
  The throbbing heart, the streaming eye.

  When sorrowing o'er some stone I bend,
  Which covers what was once a friend,
  And from his voice, his hand, his smile,
  Divides me for a little while;
  Thou, Saviour, mark'st the tears I shed,
  For Thou didst weep o'er Lazarus dead.

  And oh, when I have safely past
  Through every conflict but the last,
  Still, still unchanging, watch beside
  My painful bed, for Thou hast died;
  Then point to realms of cloudless day,
  And wipe the latest tear away.

SIR ROBERT GRANT.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM.


  When, marshalled on the nightly plain,
    The glittering host bestud the sky,
  One star alone, of all the train,
    Can fix the sinner's wandering eye.

  Hark! hark! to God the chorus breaks,
    From every host, from every gem:
  But one alone the Saviour speaks,
    It is the Star of Bethlehem.

  Once on the raging seas I rode,
    The storm was loud, the night was dark,
  The ocean yawned, and rudely blowed
    The wind that tossed my foundering bark.

  Deep horror then my vitals froze,
    Death-struck, I ceased the tide to stem;
  When suddenly a star arose,--
    It was the Star of Bethlehem.

  It was my guide, my light, my all,
    It bade my dark forebodings cease;
  And through the storm and dangers' thrall
    It led me to the port of peace.

  Now safely moored, my perils o'er,
    I'll sing, first in night's diadem,
  Forever and forevermore,
    The Star!--the Star of Bethlehem!

HENRY KIRKE WHITE.


       *       *       *       *       *

LOVE TO CHRIST.

    FROM "AN HYMNE OF HEAVENLY LOVE."


  With all thy hart, with all thy soule and mind,
  Thou must him love, and his beheasts embrace;
  All other loves, with which the world doth blind
  Weake fancies, and stirre up affections base,
  Thou must renounce and utterly displace,
  And give thy selfe unto him full and free,
  That full and freely gave himselfe to thee.

  Then shalt thou feele thy spirit so possest,
  And ravisht with devouring great desire
  Of his deare selfe, that shall thy feeble brest
  Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire
  With burning zeale, through every part entire,
  That in no earthly thing thou shalt delight,
  But in his sweet and amiable sight.

  Thenceforth all worlds desire will in thee dye,
  And all earthes glorie, on which men do gaze,
  Seeme durt and drosse in thy pure-sighted eye,
  Compared to that celestiall beauties blaze,
  Whose glorious beames all fleshly sense doth daze
  With admiration of their passing light,
  Blinding the eyes, and lumining the spright.

  Then shall thy ravisht soule inspired bee
  With heavenly thoughts farre above humane skil,
  And thy bright radiant eyes shall plainely see
  The idee of his pure glorie present still
  Before thy face, that all thy spirits shall fill
  With sweet enragement of celestiall love,
  Kindled through sight of those faire things above.

EDMUND SPENSER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE WAY, THE TRUTH, AND THE LIFE.


  O thou great Friend to all the sons of men,
    Who once appeared in humblest guise below,
  Sin to rebuke, to break the captive's chain,
    And call thy brethren forth from want and woe,--

  We look to thee! thy truth is still the Light
    Which guides the nations, groping on their way,
  Stumbling and falling in disastrous night,
    Yet hoping ever for the perfect day.

  Yes; thou art still the Life, thou art the Way
    The holiest know; Light, Life, the Way of heaven!

  And they who dearest hope and deepest pray,
    Toil by the Light, Life, Way, which thou hast given.

THEODORE PARKER.


       *       *       *       *       *

KNOCKING, EVER KNOCKING.

    "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock."
    --REVELATIONS iii. 20.


  Knocking, knocking, ever knocking?
        Who is there?
  'T is a pilgrim, strange and kingly,
        Never such was seen before;--
  Ah, sweet soul, for such a wonder,
        Undo the door.
  No,--that door is hard to open;
  Hinges rusty, latch is broken;
        Bid Him go.
  Wherefore with that knocking dreary
  Scare the sleep from one so weary?
        Say Him, no.

  Knocking, knocking, ever knocking?
        What! Still there?
  O sweet soul, but once behold Him,
  With the glory-crownèd hair;
  And those eyes, so strange and tender,
        Waiting there;
  Open! Open! Once behold Him,
        Him so fair.

  Ah, that door! Why wilt thou vex me,
  Coming ever to perplex me?
  For the key is stiffly rusty,
  And the bolt is clogged and dusty;
  Many-fingered ivy vine
  Seals it fast with twist and twine;
  Weeds of years and years before
  Choke the passage of that door.

  Knocking! knocking! What? Still knocking?
        He still there?
  What's the hour? The night is waning--
  In my heart a drear complaining,
        And a chilly, sad unrest.
  Ah, this knocking! It disturbs me!
  Scares my sleep with dreams unblest!
        Give me rest,
        Rest--ah, rest!

  Rest, dear soul, He longs to give thee;
  Thou hast only dreamed of pleasure,
  Dreamed of gifts and golden treasure,
  Dreamed of jewels in thy keeping,
  Waked to weariness of weeping;--
  Open to thy soul's one Lover,
  And thy night of dreams is over,--
  The true gifts He brings have seeming
  More than all thy faded dreaming!

  Did she open? Doth she? Will she?
  So, as wondering we behold,
  Grows the picture to a sign.
  Pressed upon your soul and mine;
  For in every breast that liveth
  Is that strange, mysterious door;--
  The forsaken and betangled,
  Ivy-gnarled and weed-bejangled,
  Dusty, rusty, and forgotten;--
  There the piercèd hand still knocketh,
  And with ever patient watching,
  With the sad eyes true and tender,
  With the glory-crownèd hair,--
  Still a God is waiting there.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.


       *       *       *       *       *

TO-MORROW.


  Lord, what am I, that, with unceasing care,
  Thou didst seek after me,--that Thou didst wait,
  Wet with unhealthy dews, before my gate,
  And pass the gloomy nights of winter there?
  O, strange delusion, that I did not greet
  Thy blest approach! and, O, to heaven how lost,
  If my ingratitude's unkindly frost
  Has chilled the bleeding wounds upon Thy feet!
  How oft my guardian angel gently cried,
  "Soul, from thy casement look, and thou shalt see
  How He persists to knock and wait for thee!"
  And, O, how often to that voice of sorrow,
  "To-morrow we will open." I replied!
  And when the morrow came, I answered still, "To-morrow."

From the Spanish of LOPE DE VEGA.

Translation of H.W. LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

I GAVE MY LIFE FOR THEE.


  I gave my life for thee,
    My precious blood I shed
  That thou mightst ransomed be,
    And quickened from the dead.
  I gave my life for thee;
  What hast thou given for me?

  I spent long years for thee
    In weariness and woe,
  That an eternity
    Of joy thou mightest know.
  I spent long years for thee;
  Hast thou spent one for me?

  My Father's home of light,
    My rainbow-circled throne,
  I left, for earthly night,
    For wanderings sad and lone.
  I left it all for thee;
  Hast thou left aught for me?

  I suffered much for thee,
    More than thy tongue may tell
  Of bitterest agony,
    To rescue thee from hell.
  I suffered much for thee;
  What canst thou bear for me?

  And I have brought to thee,
    Down from my home above,
  Salvation full and free,
    My pardon and my love.
  Great gifts I brought to thee;
  What hast thou brought to me?

  Oh, let thy life be given,
    Thy years for him be spent,
  World-fetters all be riven,
    And joy with suffering blent;
  I gave myself for thee:
  Give thou thyself to me!

FRANCES RIDLEY HAVERGAL.


       *       *       *       *       *

JESUS SHALL REIGN.


  Jesus shall reign where'er the sun
  Does his successive journeys run,--
  His kingdom spread from shore to shore,
  Till moons shall wax and wane no more.

  From north to south the princes meet
  To pay their homage at His feet,
  While western empires own their Lord,
  And savage tribes attend His word.

  To Him shall endless prayer be made,
  And endless praises crown His head;
  His name like sweet perfume shall rise
  With every morning sacrifice.

  People and realms of every tongue
  Dwell on His love with sweetest song,
  And infant voices shall proclaim
  Their early blessings on His name.

ISAAC WATTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

MESSIAH.

    A SACRED ECLOGUE, IN IMITATION OF VIRGIL'S POLLIO.


  Ye nymphs of Solyma! begin the song:
  To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong.
  The mossy fountains and the sylvan shades,
  The dreams of Pindus and th' Aonian maids,
  Delight no more--O thou my voice inspire
  Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
    Rapt into future times, the bard begun:
  A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!
  From Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
  Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies:
  Th' ethereal spirit o'er its leaves shall move,
  And on its top descends the mystic Dove.
  Ye Heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
  And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
  The sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
  From storm a shelter, and from heat a shade.
  All crimes shall cease, and ancient frauds shall fail;
  Returning Justice lift aloft her scale;
  Peace o'er the world her olive wand extend,
  And white-robed Innocence from Heaven descend.
  Swift fly the years, and rise th' expected morn!
  Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!
  See, Nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,
  With all the incense of the breathing spring:
  See lofty Lebanon his head advance,
  See nodding forests on the mountains dance:
  See spicy clouds from lowly Saron rise,
  And Carmel's flowery top perfumes the skies!
  Hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers:
  Prepare the way! a God, a God appears!
  A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,
  The rocks proclaim th' approaching Deity.
  Lo, Earth receives him from the bending skies!
  Sink down, ye mountains! and ye valleys, rise!
  With heads declined, ye cedars, homage pay!
  Be smooth, ye rocks! ye rapid floods, give way!
  The Saviour comes! by ancient bards foretold:
  Hear him, ye deaf! and all ye blind, behold!
  He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
  And on the sightless eyeball pour the day:
  'Tis he th' obstructed paths of sound shall clear
  And bid new music charm th' unfolding ear:
  The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
  And leap exulting like the bounding roe.
  No sigh, no murmur, the wide world shall hear.
  From every face he wipes off every tear.
  In adamantine chains shall Death be bound.
  And Hell's grim tyrant feel th' eternal wound.
  As the good shepherd tends his fleecy care,
  Seeks freshest pasture, and the purest air,
  Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
  By day o'ersees them, and by night protects;
  The tender lambs he raises in his arms,
  Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms:
  Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
  The promised Father of the future age.
  No more shall nation against nation rise,
  Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
  Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered o'er,
  The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
  But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
  And the broad falchion in a ploughshare end.
  Then palaces shall rise; the joyful son
  Shall finish what his short-lived sire begun;
  Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield.
  And the same hand that sowed, shall reap the field.
  The swain in barren deserts with surprise
  Sees lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise;
  And starts, amidst the thirsty wilds, to hear
  New falls of water murmuring in his ear.
  On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
  The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods.
  Waste sandy valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
  The spiry fir and shapely box adorn:
  To leafless shrubs the flowery palms succeed,
  And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
  The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead
  And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead:
  The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
  And harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.
  The smiling infant in his hand shall take
  The crested basilisk and speckled snake,
  Pleased, the green lustre of the scales survey,
  And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.
  Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!
  Exalt thy towery head, and lift thy eyes!
  See a long race thy spacious courts adorn:
  See future sons and daughters yet unborn,
  In crowding ranks on every side arise,
  Demanding life, impatient for the skies!
  See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,
  Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend!
  See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings,
  And heaped with products of Sabean springs!
  For thee Idumè's spicy forests blow,
  And seeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.
  See Heaven his sparkling portals wide display,
  And break upon thee in a flood of day!
  No more the rising Sun shall gild the morn,
  Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn;
  But lost, dissolved in thy superior rays,
  One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
  O'erflow thy courts: the Light himself shall shine
  Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine!
  The seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
  Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away!
  But fixed his word, his saving power remains;
  Thy realm for ever lasts, thy own Messiah reigns!

ALEXANDER POPE.


       *       *       *       *       *

DIES IRAE.

    "That day, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress,
    a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and
    gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, a day of the
    trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the
    high towers!"--ZEPHANIAH i. 15, 16.


  Day of vengeance, without morrow!
  Earth shall end in flame and sorrow,
  As from Saint and Seer we borrow.

  Ah! what terror is impending,
  When the Judge is seen descending,
  And each secret veil is rending!

  To the throne, the trumpet sounding,
  Through the sepulchres resounding,
  Summons all, with voice astounding.

  Death and Nature, mazed, are quaking,
  When, the grave's long slumber breaking,
  Man to judgment is awaking.

  On the written Volume's pages,
  Life is shown in all its stages--
  Judgment-record of past ages.

  Sits the Judge, the raised arraigning,
  Darkest mysteries explaining,
  Nothing unavenged remaining.

  What shall I then say, unfriended,
  By no advocate attended,
  When the just are scarce defended?

  King of majesty tremendous,
  By thy saving grace defend us,
  Fount of pity, safety send us!

  Holy Jesus, meek, forbearing,
  For my sins the death-crown wearing,
  Save me, in that day, despairing!

  Worn and weary, thou hast sought me;
  By thy cross and passion bought me--
  Spare the hope thy labors brought me!

  Righteous Judge of retribution,
  Give, O give me absolution
  Ere the day of dissolution!

  As a guilty culprit groaning,
  Flushed my face, my errors owning,
  Hear. O God, Thy suppliant moaning!

  Thou to Mary gav'st remission,
  Heard'st the dying thief's petition,
  Bad'st me hope in my contrition.

  In my prayers no worth discerning,
  Yet on me Thy favor turning,
  Save me from that endless burning!

  Give me, when Thy sheep confiding
  Thou art from the goals dividing.
  On Thy right a place abiding!

  When the wicked are rejected,
  And by bitter flames subjected,
  Call me forth with Thine elected!

  Low in supplication bending.
  Heart as though with ashes blending;
  Cure for me when all is ending.

  When on that dread day of weeping
  Guilty man in ashes sleeping
  Wakes to his adjudication,
  Save him, God! from condemnation!

From the Latin of THOMAS À CELANO.

Translation of JOHN A. DIX. [A]

[Footnote A: General Dix's first translation of the "Dies Irae" was
made in 1863; the revised version (given above) appeared in 1875.
Bayard Taylor wrote of the earlier one: "I have ... heretofore sought
in vain to find an adequate translation. Those which reproduced the
spirit neglected the form, and _vice versa_. There can be no higher
praise for yours than to say that it preserves both."]


       *       *       *       *       *

MY GOD, I LOVE THEE.


  My God, I love thee! not because
    I hope for heaven thereby;
  Nor because those who love thee not
    Must burn eternally.

  Thou, O my Jesus, thou didst me
    Upon the cross embrace!
  For me didst bear the nails and spear,
    And manifold disgrace,

  And griefs and torments numberless,
    And sweat of agony,
  Yea, death itself,--and all for one
    That was thine enemy.

  Then why, O blessed Jesus Christ,
    Should I not love thee well?
  Not for the hope of winning heaven,
    Nor of escaping hell;

  Not with the hope of gaining aught,
    Not seeking a reward;
  But as thyself hast loved me,
    O everlasting Lord!

  E'en so I love thee, and will love,
    And in thy praise will sing,--
  Solely because thou art my God,
    And my eternal King.

From the Latin of ST. FRANCIS XAVIER.

Translation of EDWARD CASWALL.


       *       *       *       *       *

VENT CREATOR SPIRITUS.

    [Sometimes attributed to the Emperor Charlemagne. The better
    opinion, however, inclines to Pope Gregory I., called the
    Great, as the author, and fixes its origin somewhere in the
    sixth century.]


  Creator Spirit, by whose aid
  The world's foundations first were laid,
  Come visit every pious mind.
  Come pour thy joys on human kind;
  From sin and sorrow set us free,
  And make thy temples worthy thee.

  O source of uncreated light.
  The Father's promised Paraclete!
  Thrice holy fount, thrice holy fire.
  Our hearts with heavenly love inspire;
  Come, and thy sacred unction bring,
  To sanctify us while we sing.

  Plenteous of grace, descend from high,
  Rich in thy seven-fold energy!
  Thou strength of his almighty hand.
  Whose power does heaven and earth command!
  Proceeding Spirit, our defence,
  Who dost the gifts of tongues dispense,
  And crown'st thy gift with eloquence!

  Refine and purge our earthly parts;
  But, O, inflame and fire our hearts!
  Our frailties help, our vice control,
  Submit the senses to the soul;
  And when rebellious they are grown,
  Then lay thy hand and hold 'em down.

  Chase from our minds the infernal foe,
  And peace, the fruit of love, bestow;
  And, lest our feet should step astray,
  Protect and guide us on the way.

  Make us eternal truths receive,
  And practise all that we believe;
  Give us thyself, that we may see
  The Father and the Son by thee.

  Immortal honor, endless fame,
  Attend the Almighty Father's name;
  The Saviour Son be glorified,
  Who for lost man's redemption died;
  And equal adoration be,
  Eternal Paraclete, to thee.

From the Latin of ST. GREGORY.

Translation of JOHN DRYDEN.


       *       *       *       *       *

VENI SANCTE SPIRITUS.

    [Written in the tenth century by Robert II., the gentle son
    of Hugh Capet. It is often mentioned as second in rank to the
    _Dies Irae_.]


  Come, Holy Ghost! thou fire divine!
  From highest heaven on us down shine!
  Comforter, be thy comfort mine!

  Come, Father of the poor, to earth;
  Come, with thy gifts of precious worth;
  Come Light of all of mortal birth!

  Thou rich in comfort! Ever blest
  The heart where thou art constant guest,
  Who giv'st the heavy-laden rest.

  Come, thou in whom our toil is sweet,
  Our shadow in the noonday heat,
  Before whom mourning flieth fleet.

  Bright Sun of Grace! thy sunshine dart
  On all who cry to thee apart,
  And fill with gladness every heart.

  Whate'er without thy aid is wrought,
  Or skilful deed, or wisest thought,
  God counts it vain and merely naught.

  O cleanse us that we sin no more.
  O'er parched souls thy waters pour;
  Heal the sad heart that acheth sore.

  Thy will be ours in all our ways;
  O melt the frozen with thy rays;
  Call home the lost in error's maze.

  And grant us, Lord, who cry to thee,
  And hold the Faith in unity,
  Thy precious gifts of charity;

  That we may live in holiness,
  And find in death our happiness,
  And dwell with thee in lasting bliss!

From the Latin of KING ROBERT II. OF FRANCE.

Translation of CATHARINE WINKWORTH.


       *       *       *       *       *

O FIRE OF GOD, THE COMFORTER.

    "O IGNIS SPIRITUS PARACLITI."


  O fire of God, the Comforter, O life of all that live,
  Holy art thou to quicken us, and holy, strength to give:
  To heal the broken-hearted ones, their sorest wounds to bind,
  O Spirit of all holiness, O Lover of mankind!
  O sweetest taste within the breast, O grace upon us poured,
  That saintly hearts may give again their perfume to the Lord.
  O purest fountain! we can see, clear mirrored in thy streams,
  That God brings home the wanderers, that God the lost redeems.
  O breastplate strong to guard our life, O bond of unity,
  O dwelling-place of righteousness, save all who trust in thee:
  Defend those who in dungeon dark are prisoned by the foe,
  And, for thy will is aye to save, let thou the captives go.
  O surest way, that through the height and through the lowest deep
  And through the earth dost pass, and all in firmest union keep;
  From thee the clouds and ether move, from thee the moisture flows,
  From thee the waters draw their rills, and earth with verdure glows,
  And thou dost ever teach the wise, and freely on them pour
  The inspiration of thy gifts, the gladness of thy lore.
  All praise to thee, O joy of life, O hope and strength, we raise,
  Who givest us the prize of light, who art thyself all praise.

From the Latin of ST. HILDEGARDE.

Translation of R.F. LITTLEDALE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE HOLY SPIRIT.


  In the hour of my distress,
  When temptations me oppress,
  And when I my sins confess,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When I lie within my bed,
  Sick at heart, and sick in head,
  And with doubts discomforted,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the house doth sigh and weep,
  And the world is drowned in sleep,
  Yet mine eyes the watch do keep,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the artless doctor sees
  No one hope but of his fees,
  And his skill runs on the lees,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When his potion and his pill
  Has or none or little skill,
  Meet for nothing but to kill,--
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the passing-bell doth toll,
  And the Furies, in a shoal,
  Come to fright a parting soul,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the tapers now burn blue,
  And the comforters are few,
  And that number more than true,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the priest his last hath prayed,
  And I nod to what is said
  'Cause my speech is now decayed,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When, God knows, I'm tost about
  Either with despair or doubt,
  Yet before the glass be out,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the tempter me pursu'th
  With the sins of all my youth,
  And half damns me with untruth,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the dames and hellish cries
  Fright mine ears, and fright mine eyes,
  And all terrors me surprise,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

  When the judgment is revealed,
  And that opened which was sealed,--
  When to thee I have appealed,
    Sweet Spirit, comfort me!

ROBERT HERRICK.


       *       *       *       *       *

HOPE OF THE HUMAN HEART.

    FROM "ANIMA MUNDI."


          God is good.
  And flight is destined for the callow wing,
  And the high appetite implies the food,
  And souls most reach the level whence they spring;
  O Life of very life! set free our powers,
  Hasten the travail of the yearning hours.

  Thou, to whom old Philosophy bent low,
  To the wise few mysteriously revealed;
  Thou, whom each humble Christian worships now,
  In the poor hamlet and the open field:
  Once an idea, now Comforter and Friend,
  Hope of the human heart, descend, descend!

RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES. (LORD HOUGHTON.)




II.

PRAYER AND ASPIRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT IS PRAYER?


  Prayer is the soul's sincere desire,
    Uttered or unexpressed--
  The motion of a hidden fire
    That trembles in the breast.

  Prayer is the burthen of a sigh,
    The falling of a tear--
  The upward glancing of an eye,
    When none but God is near.

  Prayer is the simplest form of speech
    That infant lips can try--
  Prayer the sublimest strains that reach
    The majesty on high.

  Prayer is the contrite sinner's voice
    Returning from his ways,
  While angels in their songs rejoice,
    And cry, "Behold he prays!"

  Prayer is the Christian's vital breath--
    The Christian's native air--
  His watchword at the gates of death--
    He enters heaven with prayer.

  The saints in prayer appear as one
    In word, and deed, and mind,
  While with the Father and the Son
    Sweet fellowship they find.

  Nor prayer is made by man alone--
    The Holy Spirit pleads--
  And Jesus, on the eternal throne,
    For shiners intercedes.

  O Thou by whom we come to God--
    The life, the truth, the way!
  The path of prayer Thyself hast trod;
    Lord, teach us how to pray!

JAMES MONTGOMERY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE TIME FOR PRAYER.


    When is the time for prayer?
  With the first beams that light the morning's sky,
  Ere for the toils of day thou dost prepare,
    Lift up thy thoughts on high;
  Commend the loved ones to his watchful care:
    Morn is the time for prayer!

    And in the noontide hour,
  If worn by toil, or by sad cares oppressed,
  Then unto God thy spirit's sorrow pour,
    And he will give thee rest:--
  Thy voice shall reach him through the fields of air:
    Noon is the time for prayer!

    When the bright sun hath set,--
  Whilst yet eve's glowing colors deck the skies;--
  When the loved, at home, again thou 'st met,
    Then let the prayer arise
  For those who in thy joys and sorrow share:
    Eve is the time for prayer!

  And when the stars come forth,--
  When to the trusting heart sweet hopes are given,
  And the deep stillness of the hour gives birth
    To pure, bright dreams of heaven,--
  Kneel to thy God--ask strength, life's ills to bear:
    Night is the time for prayer!

    When is the time for prayer?
  In every hour, while life is spared to thee--
  In crowds or solitudes--in joy or care--
    Thy thoughts should heavenward flee.
  At home--at morn and eve--with loved ones there,
    Bend thou the knee in prayer!

G. BENNETT.


       *       *       *       *       *

SEASONS OF PRAYER.


  To prayer, to prayer;--for the morning breaks,
  And earth in her Maker's smile awakes.
  His light is on all below and above,--
  The light of gladness, and life, and love.
  Oh, then, on the breath of this early air
  Send upward the incense of grateful prayer.

  To prayer;--for the glorious sun is gone,
  And the gathering darkness of night comes on;
  Like a curtain from God's kind hand it flows,
  To shade the couch where his children impose.
  Then kneel, while the watching stars are bright,
  And give your last thoughts to the Guardian of night.

  To prayer;--for the day that God has blest
  Comes tranquilly on with its welcome rest.
  It speaks of creation's early bloom;
  It speaks of the Prince who burst the tomb.
  Then summon the spirit's exalted powers,
  And devote to Heaven the hallowed hours.

  There are smiles and tears in the mother's eyes,
  For her new-born infant beside her lies.
  Oh, hour of bliss! when the heart o'erflows
  With rapture a mother only knows.
  Let it gush forth in words of fervent prayer;
  Let it swell up to Heaven for her precious care.

  There are smiles and tears in that gathering band,
  Where the heart is pledged with the trembling hand:
  What trying thoughts in her bosom swell,
  As the bride bids parents and home farewell!
  Kneel down by the side of the tearful pair,
  And strengthen the perilous hour with prayer.

  Kneel down by the dying sinner's side,
  And pray for his soul through Him who died.
  Large drops of anguish are thick on his brow;
  Oh, what are earth and its pleasures now!
  And what shall assuage his dark despair,
  But the penitent cry of humble prayer?

  Kneel down by the couch of departing faith,
  And hear the last words the believer saith.
  He has bidden adieu to his earthly friends;
  There is peace in his eye that upward bends;
  There is peace in his calm, confiding air;
  For his last thoughts are God's, his last words prayer.

  The voice of prayer at the sable bier!
  A voice to sustain, to soothe, and to cheer.
  It commends the spirit to God who gave;
  It lifts the thoughts from the cold, dark grave;
  It points to the glory where he shall reign,
  Who whispered, "Thy brother shall rise again."

  The voice of prayer in the world of bliss!
  But gladder, purer, than rose from this.
  The ransomed shout to their glorious King,
  Where no sorrow shades the soul as they sing;
  But a sinless and joyous song they raise,
  And their voice of prayer is eternal praise.

  Awake, awake! and gird up thy strength,
  To join that holy band at length!
  To Him who unceasing love displays,
  Whom the powers of nature unceasingly praise,--
  To Him thy heart and thy hours be given;
  For a life of prayer is the life of Heaven.

HENRY WARE, JR.


       *       *       *       *       *

EXHORTATION TO PRAYER.


  Not on a prayerless bed, not on a prayerless bed
    Compose thy weary limbs to rest;
      For they alone are blessed
        With balmy sleep
        Whom angels keep;
    Nor, though by care oppressed,
      Or anxious sorrow,
    Or thought in many a coil perplexed
      For coming morrow,
        Lay not thy head
        On prayerless bed.

  For who can tell, when sleep thine eyes shall close,
      That earthly cares and woes
     To thee may e'er return?
        Arouse, my soul!
        Slumber control,
    And let thy lamp burn brightly;
      So shall thine eyes discern
    Things pure and sightly;
      Taught by the Spirit, learn
        Never on a prayerless bed
        To lay thine unblest head.

  Hast thou no pining want, or wish, or care,
     That calls for holy prayer?
    Has thy day been so bright
        That in its flight
    There is no trace of sorrow?
    And thou art sure to-morrow
      Will be like this, and more
  Abundant? Dost thou yet lay up thy store
  And still make plans for more?
        Thou fool! this very night
        Thy soul may wing its flight.

  Hast thou no being than thyself more dear,
        That ploughs the ocean deep,
        And when storms sweep
      The wintry, lowering sky,
      For whom thou wak'st and weepest?
    Oh, when thy pangs are deepest,
  Seek then the covenant ark of prayer;
  For He that slumbereth not is there--
      His ear is open to thy cry.
        Oh, then, on prayerless bed
        Lay not thy thoughtless head.

  Arouse thee, weary soul, nor yield to slumber,
        Till in communion blest
        With the elect ye rest--
      Those souls of countless numbers;
         And with them raise
         The note of praise,
  Reaching from earth to heaven--
  Chosen, redeemed, forgiven;
      So lay thy happy head,
      Prayer-crowned, on blessed bed.

MARGARET MERCER.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAYER AND REPENTANCE.

    FROM "HAMLET," ACT III. SC. 3.


  _The King_. O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
  It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
  A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
  Though inclination be as sharp as will:
  My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;
  And, like a man to double business bound,
  I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
  And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand
  Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
  Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
  To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
  But to confront the visage of offence?
  And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
  To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
  Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up;
  My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
  Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder?"
  That cannot be: since I am still possessed
  Of those effects for which I did the murder,
  My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.
  May one be pardoned and retain the offence?
  In the corrupted currents of this world
  Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice.
  And oft 't is seen the wicked prize itself
  Buys out the law: but 't is not so above;
  There is no shuffling, there the action lies
  In his true nature; and we ourselves compelled,
  Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
  To give in evidence. What then? what rests?
  Try what repentance can: what can it not?
  Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
  O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
  O limèd soul, that, struggling to be free,
  Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!
  Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
  Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
  All may be well. [_Retires and kneels_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

  _King (rising)._ My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
  Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

SHAKESPEARE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CALIPH AND SATAN.

    VERSIFIED FROM THOLUCK'S TRANSLATION OUT OF THE PERSIAN.


  In heavy sleep the Caliph lay,
  When some one called, "Arise, and pray!"

  The angry Caliph cried, "Who dare
  Rebuke his king for slighting prayer?"

  Then, from the corner of the room,
  A voice cut sharply through the gloom:

  "My name is Satan, Rise! obey
  Mohammed's law; awake, and pray!"

  "Thy _words_ are good," the Caliph said,
  "But their intent I somewhat dread.

  For matters cannot well be worse
  Than when the thief says, 'Guard your purse!'

  I cannot trust your counsel, friend,
  It surely hides some wicked end."

  Said Satan, "Near the throne of God,
  In ages past, we devils trod;

  Angels of light, to us 't was given
  To guide each wandering foot to heaven.

  Not wholly lost is that first love.
  Nor those pure tastes we knew above.

  Roaming across a continent.
  The Tartar moves his shifting tent,

  But never quite forgets the day
  When in his father's arms he lay;

  So we, once bathed in love divine.
  Recall the taste of that rich wine.

  God's finger rested on my brow,--
  That magic touch, I feel it now!

  I fell, 't is true--O, ask not why.
  For still to God I turn my eye.

  It was a chance by which I fell,
  Another takes me back from hell.

  'T was but my envy of mankind,
  The envy of a loving mind.

  Jealous of men, I could not bear
  God's love with this new race to share.

  But yet God's tables open stand,
  His guests flock in from every land;

  Some kind act towards the race of men
  May toss us into heaven again.

  A game of chess is all we see,--
  And God the player, pieces we.

  White, black--queen, pawn,--'t is all the same,
  For on both sides he plays the game.

  Moved to and fro, from good to ill,
  We rise and fall as suits his will."

  The Caliph said, "If this be so,
  I know not, but thy guile I know;

  For how can I thy words believe,
  When even God thou didst deceive?

  A sea of lies art thou,--our sin
  Only a drop that sea within."

  "Not so," said Satan, "I serve God,
  His angel now, and now his rod.

  In tempting I both bless and curse,
  Make good men better, bad men worse.

  Good coin is mixed with bad, my brother,
  I but distinguish one from the other."

  "Granted," the Caliph said, "but still
  You never tempt to good, but ill.

  Tell then the truth, for well I know
  You come as my most deadly foe."

  Loud laughed the fiend. "You know me well,
  Therefore my purpose I will tell.

  If you had missed your prayer, I knew
  A swift repentance would ensue;

  And such repentance would have been
  A good, outweighing far the sin.

  I chose this humbleness divine,
  Borne out of fault, should not be thine,

  Preferring prayers elate with pride
  To sin with penitence allied."

JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE.


       *       *       *       *       *

DARKNESS IS THINNING.


  Darkness is thinning; shadows are retreating;
  Morning and light are coming in their beauty;
  Suppliant seek we, with an earnest outcry.
        God the Almighty!

  So that our Master, having mercy on us.
  May repel languor, may bestow salvation.
  Granting us, Father, of thy loving-kindness
        Glory hereafter!

  This, of his mercy, ever blessèd Godhead,
  Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, give us,--
  Whom through the wide world celebrate forever
        Blessing and glory!

From the Latin of ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.

Translation of JOHN MASON NEALE.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAISE.


  To write a verse or two is all the praise
          That I can raise;
      Mend my estate in any wayes,
          Thou shalt have more.

  I go to church; help me to wings, and I
          Will thither flie;
      Or, if I mount unto the skie,
          I will do more.

  Man is all weaknesse: there is no such thing
          As Prince or King:
      His arm is short; yet with a sling
          He may do more.

  A herb destilled, and drunk, may dwell next doore,
          On the same floore,
      To a brave soul: Exalt the poore,
          They can do more.

  O, raise me then! poore bees, that work all day,
          Sting my delay,
      Who have a work, as well as they,
          And much, much more.

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAYER.


  O God! though sorrow be my fate,
  And the world's hate
    For my heart's faith pursue me.
  My peace they cannot take away;
  Prom day to day
    Thou dost anew imbue me;
  Thou art not far; a little while
  Thou hid'st thy face, with brighter smile
    Thy father-love to show me.

  Lord, not my will, but thine, be done;
  If I sink down
    When men to terrors leave me,
  Thy father-love still warms my breast;
  All's for the best;
    Shall men have power to grieve me,
  When bliss eternal is my goal.
  And thou the keeper of my soul,
    Who never will deceive me?

  Thou art my shield, as saith the Word.
  Christ Jesus, Lord,
    Thou standest pitying by me,
  And lookest on each grief of mine
  And if 't were thine:
    What, then, though foes may try me.
  Though thorns be in my path concealed?
  World, do thy worst! God is my shield!
    And will be ever nigh me.

Translated from MARY, QUEEN OF HUNGARY.


       *       *       *       *       *

DESIRE.


  Thou, who dost dwell alone;
  Thou, who dost know thine own;
  Thou, to whom all are known,
  From the cradle to the grave,--
    Save, O, save!

  From the world's temptations;
  From tribulations;
  From that fierce anguish
  Wherein we languish;
  From that torpor deep
  Wherein we lie asleep,
  Heavy as death, cold as the grave,--
    Save, O, save!

  When the soul, growing clearer,
  Sees God no nearer;
  When the soul, mounting higher,
  To God comes no nigher;
  But the arch-fiend Pride
  Mounts at her side,
  Foiling her high emprize,
  Sealing her eagle eyes,
  And, when she fain would soar,
  Make idols to adore;
  Changing the pure emotion
  Of her high devotion,
  To a skin-deep sense
  Of her own eloquence;
  Strong to deceive, strong to enslave,--
    Save, O, save!

  From the ingrained fashion
  Of this earthly nature
  That mars thy creature;
  From grief, that is but passion;
  From mirth, that is but feigning;
  From tears, that bring no healing;
  From wild and weak complaining;--
  Thine old strength revealing,
    Save, O, save!

  From doubt, where all is doable,
  Where wise men are not strong;
  Where comfort turns to trouble;
  Where just men suffer wrong;
  Where sorrow treads on joy;
  Where sweet things soonest cloy;
  Where faiths are built on dust;
  Where love is half mistrust,
  Hungry, and barren, and sharp as the sea;
    O, set us free!

  O, let the false dream fly
  Where our sick souls do lie,
  Tossing continually.
  O, where thy voice doth come,
  Let all doubts be dumb;
  Let all words be mild;
  All strife be reconciled;
  All pains beguiled.
  Light brings no blindness;
  Love no unkindness;
  Knowledge no ruin;
  Fear no undoing,
  From the cradle to the grave,--
    Save, O, save!

MATTHEW ARNOLD.


       *       *       *       *       *

WHY THUS LONGING?


  Why thus longing, thus forever sighing
    For the far off, unattained, and dim,
  While the beautiful, all round thee lying,
    Offers up its low perpetual hymn?

  Wouldst thou listen to its gentle teaching,
  All thy restless yearnings it would still;
  Leaf and flower and laden bee are preaching
    Thine own sphere, though humble, first to fill.

  Poor indeed thou must be, if around thee
    Thou no ray of light and joy canst throw,--
  If no silken cord of love hath bound thee
    To some little world through weal and woe;

  If no dear eyes thy fond love can brighten,--
   No fond voices answer to thine own;
  If no brother's sorrow thou canst lighten
    By daily sympathy and gentle tone.

  Not by deeds that win the crowd's applauses,
    Not by works that gain thee world-renown,
  Not by martyrdom or vaunted crosses,
    Canst thou win and wear the immortal crown.

  Daily struggling, though unloved and lonely,
    Every day a rich reward will give;
  Thou wilt find, by hearty striving only,
    And truly loving, thou canst truly live.

  Dost thou revel in the rosy morning,
    When all nature hails the Lord of light,
  And his smile, the mountain-tops adorning,
    Robes yon fragrant fields in radiance bright?

  Other hands may grasp the field and forest,
    Proud proprietors in pomp may shine;
  But with fervent love if thou adorest,
    Thou art wealthier,--all the world is thine.

  Yet if through earth's wide domains thou rovest,
    Sighing that they are not thine alone.
  Not those fair fields, but thyself thou lovest,
    And their beauty and thy wealth are gone.

  Nature wears the color of the spirit;
    Sweetly to her worshipper she sings;
  All the glow, the grace she doth inherit,
    Round her trusting child she fondly flings.

HARRIET WINSLOW SEWALL.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAYER AND ANSWER.


  O God, I cannot walk the Way,--
  The thorns, the thirst, the darkness,
  And bleeding feet and aching heart!
  I hear the songs and revels of the throng,--
  They sneer upon my downcast face with scorn,--
  Yet, O my God, I _must_ and shall walk with Thee!

  O God, I cannot take the Truth!
  Far easier honeyed hopes and falsehoods fair,
  But Truth,--the Truth is stern and strong and awful.
  It ploughs my soul with ploughshares flaming hot--
  Yet give me Truth. I must have Truth, O God!

  O God, I cannot live the Life,--
  The flinging all to death that life may come;
  The surging of Thy Spirit in my heart
  In fire and flame will all consume me,--
  Yet, O my God, I cannot live without Thee!

  And as I agonized in dust and shame
  With tears and sighs in all the bitter prayer,
  I felt, as 't were, an arm that stole around me,
  And raised me to my feet.
  And at the touch, hope blossomed in my heart,
  And new-found strength in flood-tides thrilled and throbbed

  Through soul and limbs. I looked to see....
  O tender lordly Face!
  It was Himself,--_the Way, the Truth, the Life_!

OLIVER HUCKEL.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE AIM.


  O thou who lovest not alone
  The swift success, the instant goal,
  But hast a lenient eye to mark
  The failures of th' inconstant soul,

  Consider not my little worth,--
  The mean achievement, scamped in act,
  The high resolve and low result,
  The dream that durst not face the fact.

  But count the reach of my desire.
  Let this be something in Thy sight:--
  I have not, in the slothful dark,
  Forgot the Vision and the Height.

  Neither my body nor my soul
  To earth's low ease will yield consent.
  I praise Thee for my will to strive.
  I bless Thy goad of discontent.

CHARLES G.D. ROBERTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOVE OF GOD SUPREME.


  Thou hidden love of God, whose height,
    Whose depth unfathomed no man knows,
  I see from far thy beauteous light,
    Inly I sigh for thy repose.
  My heart is pained, nor can it be
  At rest till it finds rest in thee.

  Thy secret voice invites me still
    The sweetness of thy yoke to prove,
  And fain I would; but though my will
    Be fixed, yet wide my passions rove.
  Yet hindrances strew all the way;
  I aim at thee, yet from thee stray.

  'T is mercy all that thou hast brought
    My mind to seek her peace in thee.
  Yet while I seek but find thee not
    No peace my wand'ring soul shall see.
  Oh! when shall all my wand'rings end,
  And all my steps to-thee-ward tend?

  Is there a thing beneath the sun
    That strives with thee my heart to share?
  Ah! tear it thence and reign alone,
    The Lord of every motion there.
  Then shall my heart from earth be free,
  When it has found repose in thee.

  Oh! hide this self from me, that I
    No more, but Christ in me, may live.
  My vile affections crucify,
    Nor let one darling lust survive.
  In all things nothing may I see,
  Nothing desire or seek but thee.

  O Love, thy sovereign aid impart,
    To save me from low-thoughted care;
  Chase this self-will through all my heart,
    Through all its latent mazes there.
  Make me thy duteous child, that I
  Ceaseless may Abba, Father, cry.

  Ah! no; ne'er will I backward turn:
    Thine wholly, thine alone I am.
  Thrice happy he who views with scorn
    Earth's toys, for thee his constant flame.
  Oh! help, that I may never move
  From the blest footsteps of thy love.

  Each moment draw from earth away
    My heart, that lowly waits thy call.
  Speak to my inmost soul, and say,
    "I am thy Love, thy God, thy All."
  To feel thy power, to hear thy voice,
  To taste thy love is all my choice.

From the German of GERHARD TERSTEEGEN.

Translation of JOHN WESLEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

IN A LECTURE-ROOM.


  Away, haunt thou not me,
  Thou vain Philosophy!
  Little hast thou bestead,
  Save to perplex the head,
  And leave the spirit dead.
  Unto thy broken cisterns wherefore go.
  While from the secret treasure-depths below,
  Fed by the skyey shower,
  And clouds that sink and rest on hill-tops high,
  Wisdom at once, and Power,
  Are welling, bubbling forth, unseen, incessantly?
  Why labor at the dull mechanic oar,
  When the fresh breeze is blowing,
  And the strong current flowing,
  Right onward to the Eternal Shore?

ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH.


       *       *       *       *       *

FROM THE RECESSES OF A LOWLY SPIRIT.


  From the recesses of a lowly spirit,
  Our humble prayer ascends; O Father! hear it.
  Upsoaring on the wings of awe and meekness,
    Forgive its weakness!

  We see thy hand,--it leads us, it supports us;
  We hear thy voice,--it counsels and it courts us;
  And then we turn away; and still thy kindness
    Forgives our blindness.

  O, how long-suffering, Lord! but thou delightest
  To win with love the wandering: thou invited,
  By smiles of mercy, not by frowns or terrors,
    Man from his errors.

  Father and Saviour! plant within each bosom
  The seeds of holiness, and bid them blossom
  In fragrance and in beauty bright and vernal,
    And spring eternal.

SIR JOHN BOWRING.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE HIGHER GOOD.


  Father, I will not ask for wealth or fame,
    Though once they would have joyed my carnal sense:
  I shudder not to bear a hated name,
    Wanting all wealth, myself my sole defence.
  But give me, Lord, eyes to behold the truth;
    A seeing sense that knows the eternal right;
  A heart with pity filled, and gentlest ruth;
    A manly faith that makes all darkness light:
  Give me the power to labor for mankind;
    Make me the mouth of such as cannot speak;
  Eyes let me be to groping men, and blind;
    A conscience to the base; and to the weak
  Let me be hands and feet; and to the foolish, mind;
  And lead still further on such as thy kingdom seek.

THEODORE PARKER.


       *       *       *       *       *

ASCRIPTION.


  O thou who hast beneath Thy hand
  The dark foundations of the land,--
  The motion of whose ordered thought
  An instant universe hath wrought,--

  Who hast within Thine equal heed
  The rolling sun, the ripening seed,
  The azure of the speedwell's eye.
  The vast solemnities of sky,--

  Who hear'st no less the feeble note
  Of one small bird's awakening throat,
  Than that unnamed, tremendous chord
  Arcturus sounds before his Lord,--

  More sweet to Thee than all acclaim
  Of storm and ocean, stars and flame,
  In favor more before Thy face
  Than pageantry of time and space.

  The worship and the service be
  Of him Thou madest most like Thee,--
  Who in his nostrils hath Thy breath,
  Whose spirit is the lord of death!

CHARLES G.D. ROBERTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

O MASTER, LET ME WALK WITH THEE.


  O Master, let me walk with thee
  In lowly paths of service free;
  Tell me thy secret; help me bear
  The strain of toil, the fret of care;
  Help me the slow of heart to move
  By some clear winning word of love;
  Teach me the wayward feet to stay,
  And guide them in the homeward way.

  O Master, let me walk with thee
  Before the taunting Pharisee;
  Help me to bear the sting of spite,
  The hate of men who hide thy light,
  The sore distrust of souls sincere
  Who cannot read thy judgments clear,
  The dulness of the multitude
  Who dimly guess that thou art good.

  Teach me thy patience; still with thee
  In closer, dearer company,
  In work that keeps faith sweet and strong,
  In trust that triumphs over wrong,
  In hope that sends a shining ray
  Far down the future's broadening way,
  In peace that only thou canst give,
  With thee, O Master, let me live!

WASHINGTON GLADDEN.




III.

FAITH: HOPE: LOVE: SERVICE.

       *       *       *       *       *

FAITH.


  O world, thou choosest not the better part!
  It is not wisdom to be only wise,
  And on the inward vision close the eyes,
  But it is wisdom to believe the heart.
  Columbus found a world, and had no chart,
  Save one that faith deciphered in the skies;
  To trust the soul's invincible surmise
  Was all his science and his only art.
  Our knowledge is a torch of smoky pine
  That lights the pathway but one step ahead
  Across a void of mystery and dread.
  Bid, then, the tender light of faith to shine
  By which alone the mortal heart is led
  Unto the thinking of the thought divine.

GEORGE SANTAYANA.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE FIGHT OF FAITH.

    [The author of this poem, one of the victims of the
    persecuting Henry VIII., was burnt to death at Smithfield
    in 1546. It was made and sung by her while a prisoner in
    Newgate.]


  Like as the armèd Knighte,
  Appointed to the fielde.
  With this world wil I fight,
  And faith shal be my shilde.

  Faith is that weapon stronge,
  Which wil not faile at nede;
  My foes therefore amonge,
  Therewith wil I precede.

  As it is had in strengthe,
  And forces of Christes waye,
  It wil prevaile at lengthe,
  Though all the devils saye _naye_.

  Faithe of the fathers olde
  Obtainèd right witness,
  Which makes me verye bolde
  To fear no worldes distress.

  I now rejoice in harte,
  And hope bides me do so;
  For Christ wil take my part,
  And ease me of my we.

  Thou sayst, Lord, whoso knocke,
  To them wilt thou attende;
  Undo, therefore, the locke,
  And thy stronge power sende.

  More enemies now I have
  Than heeres upon my head;
  Let them not me deprave,
  But fight thou in my steade.

  On thee my care I cast,
  For all their cruell spight;
  I set not by their hast,
  For thou art my delight.

  I am not she that list
  My anker to let fall
  For every drislinge mist;
  My shippe's substancial.

  Not oft I use to wright
  In prose, nor yet in ryme;
  Yet wil I shewe one sight,
  That I sawe in my time:

  I sawe a royall throne,
  Where Justice shulde have sitte;
  But in her steade was One
  Of moody cruell witte.

  Absorpt was rightwisness,
  As by the raginge floude;
  Sathan, in his excess,
  Sucte up the guiltlesse bloude.

  Then thought I,--Jesus, Lorde,
  When thou shalt judge us all,
  Harde is it to recorde
  On these men what will fall.

  Yet, Lorde, I thee desire,
  For that they doe to me,
  Let them not taste the hire
  Of their iniquitie.

ANNE ASKEWE.


       *       *       *       *       *

DOUBT AND FAITH.

    FROM "IN MEMORIAM," XCV.


  You say, but with no touch of scorn,
    Sweet-hearted, you, whose light-blue eyes
    Are tender over drowning flies,
  You tell me, doubt is Devil-born.

  I know not: one indeed I knew
    In many a subtle question versed,
    Who touched a jarring lyre at first,
  But ever strove to make it true:

  Perplext in faith, but pure in deeds,
    At last he beat his music out.
    There lives more faith in honest doubt,
  Believe me, than in half the creeds.

  He fought his doubts and gathered strength,
    He would not make his judgment blind,
    He faced the spectres of the mind
  And laid them: thus he came at length

  To find a stronger faith his own;
    And Power was with him in the night,
    Which makes the darkness and the light,
  And dwells not in the light alone,

  But in the darkness and the cloud,
    As over Sinai's peaks of old,
    While Israel made their gods of gold,
  Although the trumpet blew so loud.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY TIMES ARE IN THY HAND.


    My times are in thy hand!
      I know not what a day
    Or e'en an hour may bring to me,
    But I am safe while trusting thee,
      Though all things fade away.
        All weakness, I
        On him rely
  Who fixed the earth and spread the starry sky.

    My times are in thy hand!
      Pale poverty or wealth.
    Corroding care or calm repose.
    Spring's balmy breath or winter's snows.
      Sickness or buoyant health,--
        Whate'er betide,
        If God provide,
  'T is for the best; I wish no lot beside.

    My times are in thy hand!
      Should friendship pure illume
    And strew my path with fairest flowers,
    Or should I spend life's dreary hours
      In solitude's dark gloom,
        Thou art a friend.
        Till time shall end
  Unchangeably the same; in thee all beauties blend.

    My times are in thy hand!
      Many or few, my days
    I leave with thee,--this only pray,
    That by thy grace, I, every day
      Devoting to thy praise,
        May ready be
        To welcome thee
  Whene'er thou com'st to set my spirit free.

    My times are in thy hand!
      Howe'er those times may end,
    Sudden or slow my soul's release,
    Midst anguish, frenzy, or in peace,
      I'm safe with Christ my friend.
        If he is nigh,
        Howe'er I die,
  'T will be the dawn of heavenly ecstasy.

    My times are in thy hand!
      To thee I can intrust
    My slumbering clay, till thy command
    Bids all the dead before thee stand,
      Awaking from the dust.
        Beholding thee,
        What bliss 't will be
  With all thy saints to spend eternity!

    To spend eternity
      In heaven's unclouded light!
    From sorrow, sin, and frailty free,
    Beholding and resembling thee,--
      O too transporting sight!
        Prospect too fair
        For flesh to bear!
  Haste! haste! my Lord, and soon transport me there!

CHRISTOPHER NEWMAN HALL.


       *       *       *       *       *

A MYSTICAL ECSTASY.


  E'en like two little bank-dividing brooks,
    That wash the pebbles with their wanton streams,
  And having ranged and searched a thousand nooks,
    Meet both at length in silver-breasted Thames,
    Where in a greater current they conjoin:
  So I my Best-Belovèd's am; so He is mine.

  E'en so we met; and after long pursuit,
    E'en so we joined; we both became entire;
  No need for either to renew a suit,
    For I was flax and he was flames of fire:
    Our firm-united souls did more than twine:
  So I my Best-Belovèd's am; so He is mine.

  If all those glittering Monarchs that command
    The servile quarters of this earthly ball,
  Should tender, in exchange, their shares of land,
    I would not change my fortunes for them all:
    Their wealth is but a counter to my coin:
  The world's but theirs; but my Belovèd's mine.

FRANCIS QUARLES.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTIC'S VISION


  Ah! I shall kill myself with dreams!
    These dreams that softly lap me round
  Through trance-like hours in which meseems
    That I am swallowed up and drowned;
  Drowned in your love, which flows o'er me
    As o'er the seaweed flows the sea.

  In watches of the middle night,
    'Twixt vesper and 'twist matin bell,
  With rigid arms and straining sight,
    I wait within my narrow cell;
  With muttered prayers, suspended will,
    I wait your advent--statue-still.

  Across the convent garden walls
    The wind blows from the silver seas;
  Black shadow of the cypress falls
    Between the moon-meshed olive-trees;
  Sleep-walking from their golden bowers,
  Flit disembodied orange flowers.

  And in God's consecrated house,
    All motionless from head to feet,
  My heart awaits her heavenly Spouse,
    As white I lie on my white sheet;
  With body lulled and soul awake,
  I watch in anguish for your sake.

  And suddenly, across the gloom,
    The naked moonlight sharply swings;
  A Presence stirs within the room,
    A breath of flowers and hovering wings:--
  Your presence without form and void,
  Beyond all earthly joys enjoyed.

  My heart is hushed, my tongue is mute,
    My life is centred in your will;
  You play upon me like a lute
    Which answers to its master's skill,
  Till passionately vibrating,
  Each nerve becomes a throbbing string.

  Oh, incommunicably sweet!
    No longer aching and apart,
  As rain upon the tender wheat,
    You pour upon my thirsty heart;
  As scent is bound up in the rose,
  Your love within my bosom glows.

MATHILDE BLIND.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CALL.


  Come, my way, my truth, my life--
    Such a way as gives us breath;
  Such a truth as ends all strife;
    Such a life as killeth death.

  Come my light, my feast, my strength--
    Such a light as shows a feast;
  Such a feast as mends in length;
    Such a strength as makes His guest.

  Come my joy, my love, my heart!
    Such a joy as none can move;
  Such a love as none can part;
    Such a heart as joys in love.

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

HOPE.

    FROM "THE PLEASURES OF HOPE."[A]


  Unfading Hope! when life's last embers burn,
  When soul to soul, and dust to dust return!
  Heaven to thy charge resigns the awful hour!
  O, then thy kingdom comes! Immortal Power!
  What though each spark of earth-born rapture fly
  The quivering lip, pale cheek, and closing eye!
  Bright to the soul thy seraph hands convey
  The morning dream of life's eternal day,--
  Then, then, the triumph and the trance begin,
  And all the phoenix spirit burns within!

       *       *       *       *       *

  Daughter of Faith, awake, arise, illume
  The dread unknown, the chaos of the tomb;
  Melt, and dispel, ye spectre-doubts, that roll
  Cimmerian darkness o'er the parting soul!
  Fly, like the moon-eyed herald of Dismay,
  Chased on his night-steed by the star of day!
  The strife is o'er,--the pangs of Nature close,
  And life's last rapture triumphs o'er her woes.
  Hark! as the spirit eyes, with eagle gaze,
  The noon of Heaven undazzled by the blaze,
  On heavenly winds that waft her to the sky,
  Float the sweet tones of star-born melody;
  Wild as that hallowed anthem sent to hail
  Bethlehem's shepherds in the lonely vale,
  When Jordan hushed his waves, and midnight still
  Watched on the holy towers of Zion hill!

       *       *       *       *       *

  Eternal Hope! when yonder spheres sublime
  Pealed their first notes to sound the march of Time,
  Thy joyous youth began,--but not to fade.
  When all the sister planets have decayed;
  When wrapt in fire the realms of ether glow,
  And Heaven's last thunder shakes the world below;
  Thou, undismayed, shalt o'er the ruins smile,
  And light thy torch at Nature's funeral pile.

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

[Footnote A: This poem was written when the author was but twenty-one
years of age.]


       *       *       *       *       *

A QUERY.


  Oh the wonder of our life,
  Pain and pleasure, rest and strife,
  Mystery of mysteries,
  Set twixt two eternities!

  Lo, the moments come and go,
  E'en as sparks, and vanish so;
  Flash from darkness into light,
  Quick as thought are quenched in night.

  With an import grand and strange
  Are they fraught in ceaseless change
  As they post away; each one
  Stands eternally alone.

  The scene more fair than words can say,
  I gaze upon and go my way;
  I turn, another glance to claim--
  Something is changed, 't is not the same.

  The purple flush on yonder fell,
  The tinkle of that cattle-bell,
  Came, and have never come before,
  Go, and are gone forevermore.

  Our life is held as with a vice,
  We cannot do the same thing twice;
  Once we may, but not again;
  Only memories remain.

  What if memories vanish too,
  And the past be lost to view;
  Is it all for nought that I
  Heard and saw and hurried by?

  Where are childhood's merry hours,
  Bright with sunshine, crossed with showers?
  Are they dead, and can they never
  Come again to life forever?

  No--'t is false, I surely trow;
  Though awhile they vanish now;
  Every passion, deed, and thought
  Was not born to come to nought!

  Will the past then come again,
  Rest and pleasure, strife and pain,
  All the heaven and all the hell?
  Ah, we know not: God can tell.

_GOOD WORDS_.


       *       *       *       *       *

HUMILITY.


  The bird that soars on highest wing
    Builds on the ground her lowly nest;
  And she that doth most sweetly sing
    Sings in the shade, where all things rest;
  In lark and nightingale we see
  What honor hath humility.

  When Mary chose "the better part,"
    She meekly sat at Jesus' feet;
  And Lydia's gently opened heart
    Was made for God's own temple meet:
  Fairest and best adorned is she
  Whose clothing is humility.

  The saint that wears heaven's brightest crown,
    In deepest adoration bends:
  The weight of glory bows him down
    Then most, when most his soul ascends:
  Nearest the throne itself must be
  The footstool of humility.

JAMES MONTGOMERY.


       *       *       *       *       *

KING ROBERT OF SICILY.


  Robert of Sicily, brother of Pope Urbane
  And Valmond, emperor of Allemaine,
  Apparelled in magnificent attire,
  With retinue of many a knight and squire,
  On Saint John's eve, at vespers, proudly sat
  And heard the priests chant the Magnificat.
  And as he listened o'er and o'er again
  Repeated, like a burden or refrain,
  He caught the words, "_Deposuit potentes
  De sede, et exaltavit humiles;"_
  And slowly lifting up his kingly head,
  He to a learned clerk beside him said,
  "What mean these words?" The clerk made answer meet,
  "He has put down the mighty from their seat,
  And has exalted them of low degree."
  Thereat King Robert muttered scornfully,
  "'T is well that such seditious words are sung
  Only by priests and in the Latin tongue;
  For unto priests and people be it known,
  There is no power can push me from my throne!"
  And leaning back, he yawned and fell asleep,
  Lulled by the chant monotonous and deep.

  When he awoke, it was already night;
  The church was empty, and there was no light,
  Save where the lamps that glimmered, few and faint,
  Lighted a little space before some saint.
  He started from his seat and gazed around,
  But saw no living thing and heard no sound.
  He gropèd towards the door, but it was locked;
  He cried aloud, and listened, and then knocked,
  And uttered awful threatenings and complaints,
  And imprecations upon men and saints.
  The sounds reëchoed from the roof and walls
  As if dead priests were laughing in their stalls.

  At length the sexton, hearing from without
  The tumult of the knocking and the shout,
  And thinking thieves were in the house of prayer,
  Came with his lantern, asking, "Who is there?"
  Half choked with rage, King Robert fiercely said,
  "Open: 'tis I, the king! Art thou afraid?"
  The frightened sexton, muttering, with a curse,
  "This is some drunken vagabond, or worse!"
  Turned the great key and flung the portal wide;
  A man rushed by him at a single stride,
  Haggard, half naked, without hat or cloak,
  Who neither turned, nor looked at him, nor spoke.
  But leaped into the blackness of the night,
  And vanished like a spectre from his sight.

  Robert of Sicily, brother of Pope Urbane
  And Valmond, emperor of Allemaine,
  Despoiled of his magnificent attire,
  Bare-headed, breathless, and besprent with mire,
  With sense of wrong and outrage desperate,
  Strode on and thundered at the palace gate:
  Bushed through the court-yard, thrusting in his rage
  To right and left each seneschal and page,
  And hurried up the broad and sounding stair,
  His white face ghastly in the torches' glare.
  From hall to hall he passed with breathless speed:
  Voices and cries he heard, but did not heed,
  Until at last he reached the banquet-room,
  Blazing with light, and breathing with perfume.
  There on the dais sat another king,
  Wearing his rotes, his crown, his signet-ring.
  King Robert's self in features, form, and height,
  But all transfigured with angelic light!
  It was an angel; and his presence there
  With a divine effulgence filled the air,
  An exaltation, piercing the disguise,
  Though none the hidden angel recognize.

  A moment speechless, motionless, amazed,
  The throneless monarch on the angel gazed,
  Who met his looks of anger and surprise
  With the divine compassion of his eyes;
  Then said, "Who art thou? and why com'st thou here?"
  To which King Robert answered with a sneer,
  "I am the king, and come to claim my own
  From an impostor, who usurps my throne!"
  And suddenly, at these audacious words,
  Up sprang the angry guests, and drew their swords;
  The angel answered with unruffled brow,
  "Nay, not the king, but the king's jester; thou
  Henceforth shalt wear the bells and scalloped cape,
  And for thy counsellor shalt lead an ape:
  Thou shalt obey my servants when they call,
  And wait upon my henchmen in the hall!"

  Deaf to King Robert's threats and cries and prayers,
  They thrust him from the hall and down the stairs;
  A group of tittering pages ran before,
  And as they opened wide the folding-door,
  His heart failed, for he heard, with strange alarms,
  The boisterous laughter of the men-at-arms,
  And all the vaulted chamber roar and ring
  With the mock plaudits of "Long live the king!"
  Next morning, waking with the day's first beam,
  He said within himself, "It was a dream!"
  But the straw rustled as he turned his head,
  There were the cap and bells beside his bed;
  Around him rose the bare, discolored walls.
  Close by, the steeds were champing in their stalls,
  And in the corner, a revolting shape,
  Shivering and chattering, sat the wretched ape.
  It was no dream; the world he loved so much
  Had turned to dust and ashes at his touch!

  Days came and went; and now returned again
  To Sicily the old Saturnian reign;
  Under the angel's governance benign
  The happy island danced with corn and wine,
  And deep within the mountain's burning breast
  Enceladus, the giant, was at rest.
  Meanwhile King Robert yielded to his fate,
  Sullen and silent and disconsolate.
  Dressed in the motley garb that jesters wear,
  With looks bewildered and a vacant stare,
  Close shaven above the ears, as monks are shorn,
  By courtiers mocked, by pages laughed to scorn,
  His only friend the ape, his only food
  What others left,--he still was unsubdued.
  And when the angel met him on his way,
  And half in earnest, half in jest, would say,
  Sternly, though tenderly, that he might feel
  The velvet scabbard held a sword of steel,
  "Art thou the king?" the passion of his woe
  Burst from him in resistless overflow,
  And lifting high his forehead, he would fling
  The haughty answer back, "I am, I am the king!"

  Almost three years were ended; when there came
  Ambassadors of great repute and name
  From Valmond, emperor of Allemaine,
  Unto King Robert, saying that Pope Urbane
  By letter summoned them forthwith to come
  On Holy Thursday to his city of Rome.
  The angel with great joy received his guests,
  And gave them presents of embroidered vests,
  And velvet mantles with rich ermine lined,
  And rings and jewels of the rarest kind.
  Then he departed with them o'er the sea
  Into the lovely land of Italy,
  Whose loveliness was more resplendent made
  By the mere passing of that cavalcade,
  With plumes, and cloaks, and housings, and the stir
  Of jewelled bridle and of golden spur.

  And lo! among the menials, in mock state,
  Upon a piebald steed, with shambling gait,
  His cloak of fox-tails flapping in the wind,
  The solemn ape demurely perched behind,
  King Robert rode, making huge merriment
  In all the country towns through which they went.

  The pope received them with great pomp, and blare
  Of bannered trumpets, on Saint Peter's square,
  Giving his benediction and embrace,
  Fervent, and full of apostolic grace.
  While with congratulations and with prayers
  He entertained the angel unawares,
  Robert, the jester, bursting through the crowd,
  Into their presence rushed, and cried aloud:
  "I am the king! Look and behold in me
  Robert, your brother, king of Sicily!
  This man, who wears my semblance to your eyes,
  Is an impostor in a king's disguise.
  Do you not know me? does no voice within
  Answer my cry, and say we are akin?"
  The pope in silence, but with troubled mien.
  Gazed at the angel's countenance serene;
  The emperor, laughing, said, "It is strange sport
  To keep a madman for thy fool at court!"
  And the poor, baffled jester in disgrace
  Was hustled back among the populace.

  In solemn state the holy week went by,
  And Easter Sunday gleamed upon the sky;
  The presence of an angel, with its light,
  Before the sun rose, made the city bright,
  And with new fervor filled the hearts of men,
  Who felt that Christ indeed had risen again.
  Even the Jester, on his bed of straw,
  With haggard eyes the unwonted splendor saw;
  He felt within a power unfelt before,
  And, kneeling humbly on his chamber floor,
  He heard the rustling garments of the Lord
  Sweep through the silent air, ascending heavenward.

  And now the visit ending, and once more
  Valmond returning to the Danube's shore,
  Homeward the angel journeyed, and again
  The land was made resplendent with his train,
  Flashing along the towns of Italy
  Unto Salerno, and from there by sea.
  And when once more within Palermo's wall,
  And, seated on his throne in his great hall,
  He heard the Angelus from convent towers,
  As if the better world conversed with ours,
  He beckoned to King Robert to draw nigher,
  And with a gesture bade the rest retire;
  And when they were alone, the angel said,
  "Art thou the king?" Then bowing down his head,
  King Robert crossed both hands upon his breast,
  And meekly answered him: "Thou knowest best!
  My sins as scarlet are; let me go hence,
  And in some cloister's school of penitence,
  Across those stones that pave the way to heaven
  Walk barefoot till my guilty soul is shriven!"
  The angel smiled, and from his radiant face
  A holy light illumined all the place,
  And through the open window, loud and clear,
  They heard the monks chant in the chapel near,
  Above the stir and tumult of the street:
  "He has put down the mighty from their seat,
  And has exalted them of low degree!"
  And through the chant a second melody
  Rose like the throbbing of a single string:
  "I am an angel, and thou art the king!"

  King Robert, who was standing near the throne,
  Lifted his eyes, and lo! he was alone!
  But all apparelled as in days of old,
  With ermined mantle and with cloth of gold;
  And when his courtiers came they found him there
  Kneeling upon the floor, absorbed in silent prayer.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

SERVICE.

    FROM "PIPPA PASSES."


  All service ranks the same with God:
  If now, as formerly he trod
  Paradise, his presence fills
  Our earth, each only as God wills
  Can work--God's puppets, best and worst,
  Are we; there is no last nor first.

  Say not "a small event"! Why "small"?
  Costs it more pain than this, ye call
  A "great event," should come to pass,
  Than that? Untwine me from the mass
  Of deeds which make up life, one deed
  Power shall fall short in or exceed!

ROBERT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE TWO ANGELS.


  God called the nearest angels who dwell with Him above:
  The tenderest one was Pity, the dearest one was Love.

  "Arise," He said, "my angels! a wail of woe and sin
  Steals through the gates of heaven, and saddens all within.

  "My harps take up the mournful strain that from a lost world swells,
  The smoke of torment clouds the light and blights the asphodels.

  "Fly downward to that under world, and on its souls of pain,
  Let Love drop smiles like sunshine, and Pity tears like rain!"

  Two faces bowed before the Throne, veiled in their golden hair;
  Four white wings lessened swiftly down the dark abyss of air.

  The way was strange, the flight was long; at last the angels came
  Where swung the lost and nether world, red-wrapped in rayless flame.

  There Pity, shuddering, wept; but Love, with faith too strong for fear,
  Took heart from God's almightiness and smiled a smile of cheer.

  And lo! that tear of Pity quenched the flame whereon it fell,
  And, with the sunshine of that smile, hope entered into hell!

  Two unveiled faces full of joy looked upward to the Throne,
  Four white wings folded at the feet of Him who sat thereon!

  And deeper than the sound of seas, more soft than falling flake,
  Amidst the hush of wing and song the Voice Eternal spake:

  "Welcome, my angels! ye have brought a holier joy to heaven;
  Henceforth its sweetest song shall be the song of sin forgiven!"

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SELF-EXILED.


  There came a soul to the gate of Heaven
      Gliding slow--
  A soul that was ransomed and forgiven,
      And white as snow:
  And the angels all were silent.

  A mystic light beamed from the face
      Of the radiant maid,
  But there also lay on its tender grace
      A mystic shade:
  And the angels all were silent.

  As sunlit clouds by a zephyr borne
      Seem not to stir,
  So to the golden gates of morn
      They carried her:
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Now open the gate, and let her in,
      And fling It wide,
  For she has been cleansed from stain of sin,"
      Saint Peter cried:
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Though I am cleansed from stain of sin,"
      She answered low,
  "I came not hither to enter in,
      Nor may I go:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "I come," she said, "to the pearly door,
      To see the Throne
  Where sits the Lamb on the Sapphire Floor,
      With God alone:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "I come to hear the new song they sing
      To Him that died,
  And note where the healing waters spring
      From His piercèd side:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "But I may not enter there," she said,
      "For I must go
  Across the gulf where the guilty dead
      Lie in their woe:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "If I enter heaven I may not pass
      To where they be,
  Though the wail of their bitter pain, alas!
      Tormenteth me:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "If I enter heaven I may not speak
      My soul's desire
  For them that are lying distraught and weak
      In flaming fire:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "I had a brother, and also another
      Whom I loved well;
  What if, in anguish, they curse each other
      In the depths of hell?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "How could I touch the golden harps,
      When all my praise
  Would be so wrought with grief-full warps
      Of their sad days?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "How love the loved who are sorrowing,
      And yet be glad?
  How sing the songs ye are fain to sing,
      While I am sad?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Oh, clear as glass in the golden street
      Of the city fair,
  And the tree of life it maketh sweet
      The lightsome air:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "And the white-robed saints with their crowns and palms
      Are good to see,
  And oh, so grand are the sounding psalms!
      But not for me:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "I come where there is no night," she said,
      "To go away,
  And help, if I yet may help, the dead
      That have no day."
  And the angels all were silent.

  Saint Peter he turned the keys about,
      And answered grim:
  "Can you love the Lord and abide without,
      Afar from Him?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Can you love the Lord who died for you,
      And leave the place
  Where His glory is all disclosed to view,
      And tender grace?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "They go not out who come in here;
      It were not meet:
  Nothing they lack, for He is here,
      And bliss complete."
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Should I be nearer Christ," she said,
      "By pitying less
  The sinful living or woful dead
      In their helplessness?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Should I be liker Christ were I
      To love no more
  The loved, who in their anguish lie
      Outside the door?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Did He not hang on the cursèd tree,
      And bear its shame,
  And clasp to His heart, for love of me,
      My guilt and blame?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "Should I be liker, nearer Him,
      Forgetting this,
  Singing all day with the Seraphim,
      In selfish bliss?"
  And the angels all were silent.

  The Lord Himself stood by the gate,
      And heard her speak
  Those tender words compassionate,
      Gentle and meek:
  And the angels all were silent.

  Now, pity is the touch of God
      In human hearts,
  And from that way He ever trod
      He ne'er departs:
  And the angels all were silent.

  And He said, "Now will I go with you,
      Dear child of love,
  I am weary of all this glory, too,
      In heaven above:"
  And the angels all were silent.

  "We will go seek and save the lost,
      If they will hear,
  They who are worst but need me most,
      And all are dear:"
  And the angels were not silent.

WALTER C. SMITH.


       *       *       *       *       *

SYMPATHY.

    FROM "ION," ACT I. SC. 2.


                        'T is a little thing
  To give a cup of water; yet its draught
  Of cool refreshment, drained by fevered lips,
  May give a shock of pleasure to the frame
  More exquisite than when nectarean juice
  Renews the life of joy in happier hours.
  It is a little thing to speak a phrase
  Of common comfort which by daily use
  Has almost lost its sense, yet on the ear
  Of him who thought to die unmourned 't will fall
  Like choicest music, fill the glazing eye
  With gentle tears, relax the knotted hand
  To know the bonds of fellowship again;
  And shed on the departing soul a sense,
  More precious than the benison of friends
  About the honored death-bed of the rich,
  To him who else were lonely, that another
  Of the great family is near and feels.

SIR THOMAS NOON TALFOURD.


       *       *       *       *       *

SIR GALAHAD.


  My good blade carves the casques of men,
    My tough lance thrusteth sure,
  My strength is as the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure.
  The shattering trumpet shrilleth high,
    The hard brands shiver on the steel,
  The splintered spear-shafts crack and fly,
    The horse and rider reel:
  They reel, they roll in clanging lists,
    And when the tide of combat stands,
  Perfume and flowers fall in showers,
    That lightly rain from ladies' hands.

  How sweet are looks that ladies bend
    On whom their favors fall!
  For them I battle till the end,
    To save from shame and thrall:
  But all my heart is drawn above,
    My knees are bowed in crypt and shrine:
  I never felt the kiss of love,
    Nor maiden's hand in mine.
  More bounteous aspects on me beam,
    Me mightier transports move and thrill;
  So keep I fair thro' faith and prayer
    A virgin heart in work and will.

  When down the stormy crescent goes,
    A light before me swims.
  Between dark stems the forest glows,
    I hear a noise of hymns:
  Then by some secret shrine I ride;
    I hear a voice, but none are there;
  The stalls are void, the doors are wide,
    The tapers burning fair.
  Fair gleams the snowy altar-cloth,
    The silver vessels sparkle clean,
  The shrill bell rings, the censer swings,
    And solemn chaunts resound between.

  Sometimes on lonely mountain-meres
    I find a magic bark;
  I leap on board: no helmsman steers:
    I float till all is dark.
  A gentle sound, an awful light!
    Three angels bear the holy Grail:
  With folded feet, in stoles of white,
    On sleeping wings they sail.
  Ah, blessèd vision! blood of God!
    My spirit beats her mortal bars,
  As down dark tides the glory slides,
    And star-like mingles with the stars.

  When on my goodly charger borne
    Thro' dreaming towns I go,
  The cock crows ere the Christmas morn,
    The streets are dumb with snow.
  The tempest crackles on the leads,
    And, ringing, springs from brand and mail;
  But o'er the dark a glory spreads,
    And gilds the driving hail.
  I leave the plain, I climb the height;
    No branchy thicket shelter yields;
  But blessèd forms in whistling storms
    Fly o'er waste fens and windy fields.

  A maiden knight--to me is given
    Such hope, I know not fear;
  I yearn to breathe the airs of heaven
    That often meet me here.
  I muse on joy that will not cease,
    Pure spaces clothed in living beams,
  Pure lilies of eternal peace,
    Whose odors haunt my dreams;
  And, stricken by an angel's hand,
    This mortal armor that I wear.
  This weight and size, this heart and eyes,
    Are touched, and turned to finest air.

  The clouds are broken in the sky,
    And thro' the mountain-walls
  A rolling organ-harmony
    Swells up, and shakes and falls.
  Then move the trees, the copses nod,
    Wings flutter, voices hover clear:
  "O just and faithful knight of God!
    Ride on! the prize is near."
  So pass I hostel, hall, and grange;
    By bridge and ford, by park and pale,
  All-armed I ride, whate'er betide,
    Until I find the holy Grail.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

FLOWERS WITHOUT FRUIT.


  Prune thou thy words; the thoughts control
    That o'er thee swell and throng;--
  They will condense within thy soul,
    And change to purpose strong.

  But he who lets his feelings run
    In soft luxurious flow,
  Shrinks when hard service must be done,
    And faints at every woe.

  Faith's meanest deed more favor bears,
    Where hearts and wills are weighed,
  Than brightest transports, choicest prayers,
    Which bloom their hour, and fade.

JOHN HENRY NEWMAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

SANTA FILOMENA.

    [FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.]


  Whene'er a noble deed is wrought,
  Whene'er is spoken a noble thought,
    Our hearts, in glad surprise,
    To higher levels rise.

  The tidal wave of deeper souls
  Into our inmost being rolls,
    And lifts us unawares
    Out of all meaner cares.

  Honor to those whose words or deeds
  Thus help us in our daily needs,
    And by their overflow
    Raise us from what is low!

  Thus thought I, as by night I read
  Of the great army of the dead,
    The trenches cold and damp,
    The starved and frozen camp,

  The wounded from the battle-plain,
  In dreary hospitals of pain,
    The cheerless corridors,
    The cold and stony floors.

  Lo! in that house of misery
  A lady with a lamp I see
    Pass through the glimmering gloom,
    And flit from room to room.

  And slow, as in a dream of bliss,
  The speechless sufferer turns to kiss
    Her shadow, as it falls
    Upon the darkening walls.

  As if a door in heaven should be
  Opened and then closed suddenly,
    The vision came and went,
    The light shone and was spent.

  On England's annals, through the long
  Hereafter of her speech and song,
    That light its rays shall cast
    From portals of the past.

  A Lady with a Lamp shall stand
  In the great history of the land,
    A noble type of good,
    Heroic womanhood.

  Nor even shall be wanting here
  The palm, the lily, and the spear,
    The symbols that of yore
    Saint Filomena bore.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

A DEED AND A WORD.


  A little stream had lost its way
    Amid the grass and fern;
  A passing stranger scooped a well,
    Where weary men might turn;
  He walled it in and hung with care
    A ladle at the brink;
  He thought not of the deed he did,
    But judged that all might drink.
  He passed again, and lo! the well,
    By summer never dried,
  Had cooled ten thousand parching tongues,
    And saved a life beside.

  A nameless man, amid a crowd
    That thronged the daily mart,
  Let fall a word of hope and love,
    Unstudied, from the heart;
  A whisper on the tumult thrown,
    A transitory breath--
  It raised a brother from the dust,
    It saved a soul from death.
  O germ! O fount! O word of love!
    O thought at random cast!
  Ye were but little at the first,
    But mighty at the last.

CHARLES MACKAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOGGARTH AROON.


  Am I the slave they say,
    Soggarth aroon?[A]
  Since you did show the way,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Their slave no more to be,
  While they would work with me
  Old Ireland's slavery,
    Soggarth aroon.

  Why not her poorest man,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Try and do all he can,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Her commands to fulfil
  Of his own heart and will,
  Side by side with you still,
    Soggarth aroon?

  Loyal and brave to you,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Yet be not slave to you,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Nor, out of fear to you,
  Stand up so near to you--
  Och! out of fear to _you_,
    Soggarth aroon!

  Who, in the winter's night,
    Soggarth aroon,
  When the cold blasts did bite,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Came to my cabin-door,
  And on my earthen-floor
  Knelt by me, sick and poor,
    Soggarth aroon?

  Who, on the marriage day,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Made the poor cabin gay,
    Soggarth aroon,
  And did both laugh and sing,
  Making our hearts to ring
  At the poor christening,
    Soggarth aroon?

  Who, as friends only met,
    Soggarth aroon,
  Never did flout me yet,
    Soggarth aroon;
  And when my heart was dim,
  Gave, while his eye did brim,
  What I should give to him,
    Soggarth aroon?

  Och! you, and only you,
    Soggarth aroon!
  And for this I was true to you,
    Soggarth aroon!
  Our love they'll never shake,
  When for ould Ireland's sake
  We a true part did take,
    Soggarth aroon!

JOHN BANIM.

[Footnote A: Priest, dear.]


       *       *       *       *       *

THE VISION OF SIR LAUNFAL.


  PRELUDE TO PART FIRST.

  Over his keys the musing organist,
    Beginning doubtfully and far away,
  First lets his fingers wander as they list,
    And builds a bridge from Dreamland for his lay;
  Then, as the touch of his loved instrument
    Gives hope and fervor, nearer draws his theme,
  First guessed by faint auroral flushes sent
    Along the wavering vista of his dream.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Not only around our infancy
      Doth heaven with all its splendors lie;
      Daily, with souls that cringe and plot,
      We Sinais climb and know it not.

  Over our manhood bend the skies;
    Against our fallen and traitor lives
  The great winds utter prophecies;
    With our faint hearts the mountain strives;
  Its arms outstretched, the druid wood
    Waits with its Benedicite;
  And to our age's drowsy blood
    Still shouts the inspiring sea.

  Earth gets its price for what Earth gives us:
    The beggar is taxed for a corner to die in.
  The priest hath his fee who comes and shrives us,
    We bargain for the graves we lie in;
  At the devil's booth are all things sold,
  Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold;

  For a cap and bells our lives we pay,
    Bubbles we buy with a whole soul's tasking:
  'Tis heaven alone that is given away,
    'Tis only God may be had for the asking;
  No price is set on the lavish summer;
  June may be had by the poorest comer.

  And what is so rare as a day in June?
    Then, if ever, come perfect days;
  Then Heaven tries earth if it be in tune,
    And over it softly her warm ear lays;
  Whether we look, or whether we listen,
  We hear life murmur, or see it glisten;
  Every clod feels a stir of might,
    An instinct within it that reaches and towers,
  And groping blindly above it for light,
    Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers;
  The flush of life may well be seen
    Thrilling back over hills and valleys;
  The cowslip startles in meadows green,
    The buttercup catches the sun in its chalice,
  And there's never a leaf nor a blade too mean
    To be some happy creature's palace;
  The little bird sits at his door in the sun,
    Atilt like a blossom among the leaves,
  And lets his illumined being o'errun
    With the deluge of summer it receives;
  His mate feels the eggs beneath her wings,
  And the heart in her dumb breast flutters and sings;
  He sings to the wide world, and she to her nest,--
  In the nice ear of Nature which song is the best?

  Now is the high tide of the year,
    And whatever of life hath ebbed away
  Comes flooding back with a ripply cheer,
    Into every bare inlet and creek and bay;
  Now the heart is so full that a drop overfills it;
  We are happy now because God wills it;
  No matter how barren the past may have been,
  'T is enough for us now that the leaves are green;
  We sit in the warm shade and feel right well
  How the sap creeps up and the blossoms swell;
  We may shut our eyes, but we cannot help knowing
  That skies are clear and grass is growing;
    The breeze comes whispering in our ear
    That dandelions are blossoming near,
  That maize has sprouted, that streams are flowing.
  That the river is bluer than the sky,
  That the robin is plastering his house hard by:
  And if the breeze kept the good news back,
  For other couriers we should not lack;
    We could guess it all by yon heifer's lowing,--
  And hark! how clear bold chanticleer,
  Warmed with the new wine of the year,
    Tells all in his lusty crowing!

  Joy comes, grief goes, we know not how;
  Everything is happy now,
    Everything is upward striving;
  'T is as easy now for the heart to be true
  As for grass to be green or skies to be blue,--
    'Tis the natural way of living:
  Who knows whither the clouds have fled?
    In the unscarred heaven they leave no wake;
  And the eyes forget the tears they have shed,
    The heart forgets its sorrow and ache;
  The soul partakes the season's youth,
    And the sulphurous rifts of passion and woe
  Lie deep 'neath a silence pure and smooth,
    Like burnt-out craters healed with snow.
      What wonder if Sir Launfal now
      Remember the keeping of his vow?


  PART FIRST.

      "My golden spurs now bring to me,
        And bring to me my richest mail,
      For to-morrow I go over land and sea
        In search of the Holy Grail:
      Shall never a bed for me be spread,
      Nor shall a pillow be under my head,
      Till I begin my vow to keep;
      Here on the rushes will I sleep,
      And perchance there may come a vision true
      Ere day create the world anew."
        Slowly Sir Launfal's eyes grew dim;
        Slumber fell like a cloud on him,
      And into his soul the vision flew.

    The crows flapped over by twos and threes,
    In the pool drowsed the cattle up to their knees,
      The little birds sang as if it were
      The one day of summer in all the year,
    And the very leaves seemed to sing on the trees:
    The castle alone in the landscape lay
  Like an outpost of winter, dull and gray;
  'T was the proudest hall in the North Countree,
  And never its gates might opened be,
  Save to lord or lady of high degree;
  Summer besieged it on every side,
  But the churlish stone her assaults defied;
  She could not scale the chilly wall,
  Though around it for leagues her pavilions tall
    Stretched left and right.
    Over the hills and out of sight;
      Green and broad was every tent,
      And out of each a murmur went
    Till the breeze fell off at night.

  The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang,
  And through the dark arch a charger sprang,
  Bearing Sir Launfal, the maiden knight,
  In his gilded mail, that flamed so bright
  It seemed the dark castle had gathered all
  Those shafts the fierce sun had shot over its wall
    In his siege of three hundred summers long,
  And binding them all in one blazing sheaf,
    Had cast them forth; so, young and strong,
  And lightsome as a locust leaf,
  Sir Launfal flashed forth in his maiden mail,
  To seek in all climes for the Holy Grail.

  It was morning on hill and stream and tree,
    And morning in the young knight's heart;
  Only the castle moodily
  Rebuffed the gifts of the sunshine free,
    And gloomed by itself apart;
  The season brimmed all other things up
  Full as the rain fills the pitcher-plant's cup.

  As Sir Launfal made morn through the darksome gate,
    He was 'ware of a leper, crouched by the same,
  Who begged with his hand and moaned as he sate;
    And a loathing over Sir Launfal came;
  The sunshine went out of his soul with a thrill,
    The flesh 'neath his armor 'gan shrink and crawl,
  And midway its leap his heart stood still
    Like a frozen waterfall;
    For this man, so foul and bent of stature,
    Rasped harshly against his dainty nature,
    And seemed the one blot on the summer morn,--
    So he tossed him a piece of gold in scorn.

    The leper raised not the gold from the dust:--
    "Better to me the poor man's crust,
    Better the blessing of the poor,
    Though I turn me empty from his door:
    That is no true alms which the hand can hold;
    He gives only the worthless gold
      Who gives from a sense of duty:
    But he who gives but a slender mite,
    And gives to that which is out of sight,--
      That thread of the all-sustaining Beauty
    Which runs through all and doth all unite,--
    The hand cannot clasp the whole of his alms,
    The heart outstretches its eager palms;
    For a god goes with it and makes it store
    To the soul that was starving in darkness before."


  PRELUDE TO PART SECOND.

  Down swept the chill wind from the mountain peak,
    From the snow five thousand summers old;
  On open wold and hilltop bleak
    It had gathered all the cold,
  And whirled it like sleet on the wanderer's cheek;
    It carried a shiver everywhere
    From the unleafed boughs and pastures bare;
  The little brook heard it, and built a roof
  'Neath which he could house him winter-proof;
  All night by the white stars' frosty gleams
  He groined his arches and matched his beams;
  Slender and clear were his crystal spars
  As the lashes of light that trim the stars;
  He sculptured every summer delight
  In his halls and chambers out of sight;
  Sometimes his tinkling waters slipt
  Down through a frost-leaved forest crypt.
  Long, sparkling aisles of steel stemmed trees
  Mending to counterfeit a breeze;
  Sometimes the roof no fretwork knew
  But silvery mosses that downward grew;
  Sometimes it was carved in sharp relief
  With quaint arabesques of ice-fern leaf;
  Sometimes it was simply smooth and clear
  For the gladness of heaven to shine through, and here
  He had caught the nodding bulrush tops
  And hung them thickly with diamond drops.
  That crystalled the beams of moon and sun,
  And made a star of every one:
  No mortal builder's most rare device
  Could match this winter palace of ice;
  'T was as if every image that mirrored lay
  In his depths serene through the summer day,
  Each fleeting shadow of earth and sky,
    Lest the happy model should be lost.
  Sad been mimicked in fairy masonry
    By the elfin builders of the frost.

  Within the hall are song and laughter;
    The cheeks of Christmas glow red and jolly,
  And sprouting is every corbel and rafter
    With lightsome green of ivy and holly;
  Through the deep gulf of the chimney wide
  Wallows the Yule-log's roaring tide;
  The broad flame pennons droop and flap
    And belly and tug as a flag in the wind;
  Like a locust shrills the imprisoned sap,
    Hunted to death in its galleries blind;
  And swift little troops of silent sparks,
    Now pausing, now scattering away as in fear,
  Go threading the soot forest's tangled darks
    Like herds of startled deer.

  But the wind without was eager and sharp;
  Of Sir Launfal's gray hair it makes a harp,
    And rattles and wrings
    The icy strings,
  Singing in dreary monotone
  A Christmas carol of its own,
  Whose burden still, as he might guess,
  Was "Shelterless, shelterless, shelterless!"

  The voice of the seneschal flared like a torch
  As he shouted the wanderer away from the porch,
  And he sat in the gateway and saw all night
    The great hall fire, so cheery and bold,
    Through the window slits of the castle old,
    Build out its piers of ruddy light
    Against the drift of the cold.


  PART SECOND.

  There was never a leaf on bush or tree,
  The bare boughs rattled shudderingly;
  The river was dumb and could not speak,
    For the weaver Winter its shroud had spun;
  A single crow on the tree-top bleak
    From his shining feathers shed off the cold sun;
  Again it was morning, but shrunk and cold,
  As if her veins were sapless and old,
  And she rose up decrepitly
  For a last dim look at earth and sea.

  Sir Launfal turned from his own hard gale,
  For another heir in his earldom sate:
  An old, bent man, worn out and frail,
  He came back from seeking the Holy Grail.
  Little he recked of his earldom's loss,
  No more on his surcoat was blazoned the cross;
  But deep in his soul the sigh he wore,
  The badge of the suffering and the poor.

  Sir Launfal's raiment thin and spare
  Was idle mail 'gainst the barbèd air,
  For it was just at the Christmas-time;
  So he mused, as he sat, of a sunnier clime,
  And sought for a shelter from cold and snow
  In the light and warmth of long ago.
  He sees the snake-like caravan crawl
  O'er the edge of the desert, black and small,
  Then nearer and nearer, till, one by one,
  He can count the camels in the sun,
  As over the red-hot sands they pass
  To where, in its slender necklace of grass,
  The little spring laughed and leapt in the shade.
  And with its own self like an infant played,
  And waved its signal of palms.

  "For Christ's sweet sake, I beg an alms:"--
  The happy camels may reach the spring,
  But Sir Launfal sees only the grewsome thing,
  The leper, lank as the rain-blanched bone,
  That cowers beside him, a thing as lone
  And white as the ice-isles of Northern seas
  In the desolate horror of his disease.

  And Sir Launfal said,--"I behold in thee
  An image of Him who died on the tree;
  Thou also hast had thy crown of thorns,--
  Thou also hast had the world's buffets and scorns,--

  And to thy life were not denied
  The wounds in the hands and feet and side:
  Mild Mary's Son, acknowledge me;
  Behold, through him, I give to thee!"

  Then the soul of the leper stood up in his eyes
    And looked at Sir Launfal, and straightway he
  Remembered in what a haughtier guise
    He had flung an alms to leprosie,
  When he girt his young life up in gilded mail
  And set forth in search of the Holy Grail.
  The heart within him was ashes and dust:
  He parted in twain his single crust,
  He broke the ice on the streamlet's brink,
  And gave the leper to eat and drink;
  'T was a mouldy crust of coarse brown bread
    'T was water out of a wooden bowl,--
  Yet with fine wheaten bread was the leper fed,
    And 't was red wine he drank with his thirsty soul

  As Sir Launfal mused with a downcast face,
  A light shone round about the place;
  The leper no longer crouched at his side,
  But stood before him glorified,
  Shining and tall and fair and straight
    As the pillar that stood by the Beautiful Gate,--
    Himself the Gate whereby men can
    Enter the temple of God in Man.

  His words were shed softer than leaves from the pine,
  And they fell on Sir Launfal as snows on the brine,
  That mingle their softness and quiet in one
  With the shaggy unrest they float down upon;
  And the voice that was softer than silence said:--
  Lo, it is I, be not afraid!
  In many climes, without avail,
  Thou hast spent thy life for the Holy Grail:
  Behold, it is here,--this cup which thou
  Didst fill at the streamlet for me but now;
  This crust is my body broken for thee,
  This water His blood that died on the tree;
  The Holy Supper is kept indeed
  In whatso we share with another's need.
  Not, what we give, but what we share,--
  For the gift without the giver is bare:
  Who gives himself with his alms feeds three.--
  Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me."

  Sir Launfal awoke as from a swound:--
  "The Grail in my castle here is found!
  Hang my idle armor up on the wall,
  Let it be the spider's banquet-hall;
  He must be fenced with stronger mail
  Who would seek and find the Holy Grail."

  The castle gate stands open now,
    And the wanderer is welcome to the hall
  As the hang-bird is to the elm-tree bough;
    No longer scowl the turrets tall.
  The summer's long siege at last is o'er:
  When the first poor outcast went in at the door,
  She entered with him in disguise,
  And mastered the fortress by surprise;
  There is no spot she loves so well on ground;
  She lingers and smiles there the whole year round;
  The meanest serf on Sir Launfal's land
  Has hall and bower at his command;
  And there's no poor man in the North Countree
  But is lord of the earldom as much as he.

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SISTER OF CHARITY.


  She once was a lady of honor and wealth;
  Bright glowed in her features the roses of health;
  Her vesture was blended of silk and of gold,
  And her motion shook perfume from every fold:
  Joy revelled around her, love shone at her side,
  And gay was her smile as the glance of a bride;
  And light was her step in the mirth-sounding hall,
  When she heard of the daughters of Vincent de Paul.

  She felt in her spirit the summons of grace,
  That called her to live for her suffering race;
  And, heedless of pleasure, of comfort, of home,
  Rose quickly, like Mary, and answered, "I come."
  She put from her person the trappings of pride,
  And passed from her home with the joy of a bride,
  Nor wept at the threshold as onward she moved,--
  For her heart was on fire in the cause it approved.

  Lost ever to fashion, to vanity lost,
  That beauty that once was the song and the toast,
  No more in the ball-room that figure we meet,
  But gliding at dusk to the wretch's retreat.
  Forgot in the halls is that high-sounding name,
  For the Sister of Charity blushes at fame:
  Forgot are the claims of her riches and birth,
  For she barters for heaven the glory of earth.

  Those feet, that to music could gracefully move,
  Now bear her alone on the mission of love;
  Those hands, that once dangled the perfume and gem,
  Are tending the helpless, or lifted for them;
  That voice, that once echoed the song of the vain.
  Now whispers relief to the bosom of pain;
  And the hair that was shining with diamond and pearl,
  Is wet with the tears of the penitent girl.

  Her down-bed, a pallet--her trinkets, a bead;
  Her lustre--one taper, that serves her to read;
  Her sculpture--the crucifix nailed by her bed;
  Her paintings--one print of the thorn-crownèd head;
  Her cushion--the pavement that wearies her knees;
  Her music--the psalm, or the sigh of disease:
  The delicate lady lives mortified there,
  And the feast is forsaken for fasting and prayer.

  Yet not to the service of heart and of mind
  Are the cares of that heaven-minded virgin confined:
  Like Him whom she loves, to the mansions of grief
  She hastes with the tidings of joy and relief.
  She strengthens the weary, she comforts the weak,
  And soft is her voice in the ear of the sick;
  Where want and affliction on mortals attend,
  The Sister of Charity there is a friend.

  Unshrinking where pestilence scatters his breath,
  Like an angel she moves, mid the vapors of death;
  Where rings the loud musket, and flashes the sword,
  Unfearing she walks, for she follows her Lord.
  How sweetly she bends o'er each plague-tainted face,
  With looks that are lighted with holiest grace;
  How kindly she dresses each suffering limb,
  For she sees in the wounded the image of Him.

  Behold her, ye worldly! behold her, ye vain!
  Who shrink from the pathway of virtue and pain!
  Who yield up to pleasure your nights and your days,
  Forgetful of service, forgetful of praise.
  Ye lazy philosophers, self-seeking men;
  Ye fireside philanthropists, great at the pen;
  How stands in the balance your eloquence weighed
  With the life and the deeds of that high-born maid?

GERALD JOSEPH GRIFFEN.


       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT I LIVE FOR.


  I live for those who love me,
    Whose hearts are kind and true,
  For heaven that smiles above me,
    And waits my spirit, too;
  For all the ties that bind me,
  For all the tasks assigned me.
  And bright hopes left behind me,
    And good that I can do.

  I live to learn their story
    Who've suffered for my sake,
  To emulate their glory,
    And follow in their wake;
  Bards, patriots, martyrs, sages,
  The noble of all ages,
  Whose deeds crown history's pages,
    And Time's great volume make.

  I live to hold communion
    With all that is divine,
  To feel there is a union
    'Twixt Nature's heart and mine;
  To profit by affliction,
  Reap truths from fields of fiction,
  And, wiser from conviction,
    Fulfil each grand design.

  I live to hail that season,
    By gifted minds foretold,
  When men shall rule by reason,
    And not alone by gold;
  When man to man united,
  And every wrong thing righted,
  The whole world shall be lighted
    As Eden was of old.

  I live for those who love me,
    Whose hearts are kind and true,
  For heaven that smiles above me,
    And waits my spirit too;
  For the cause that lacks assistance,
  For the wrong that needs resistance,
  For the future in the distance,
    And the good that I can do.

GEORGE LINNAEUS BANKS.


       *       *       *       *       *

IF WE HAD BUT A DAY.


  We should fill the hours with the sweetest things,
    If we had but a day;
  We should drink alone at the purest springs
    In our upward way;
  We should love with a lifetime's love in an hour,
    If the hours were few;
  We should rest, not for dreams, but for fresher power
    To be and to do.

  We should guide our wayward or wearied wills
    By the clearest light;
  We should keep our eyes on the heavenly hills,
    If they lay in sight;
  We should trample the pride and the discontent
    Beneath our feet;
  We should take whatever a good God sent,
    With a trust complete.

  We should waste no moments in weak regret,
    If the day were but one;
  If what we remember and what we forget
    Went out with the sun;
  We should be from our clamorous selves set free,
    To work or to pray,
  And to be what the Father would have us be.
    If we had but a day.

MARY LOWE DICKINSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

ABOU BEN ADHEM.


  Abou Ben Adhem (may his tribe increase!)
  Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace,
  And saw within the moonlight in his room,
  Making it rich and like a lily in bloom.
  An angel writing in a book of gold:
  Exceeding peace had made Ben Adhem bold,
  And to the presence in the room he said,
  "What writest thou?" The vision raised its head,
  And, with a look made of all sweet accord,
  Answered, "The names of those who love the Lord."
  "And is mine one?" said Abou. "Nay, not so."
  Replied the angel. Abou spoke more low,
  But cheerly still; and said, "I pray thee, then,
  Write me as one that loves his fellow-men."
  The angel wrote, and vanished. The next night
  It came again with a great wakening light,
  And showed the names whom love of God had blessed,--
  And lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest!

LEIGH HUNT.


       *       *       *       *       *

LOVE.


  If suddenly upon the street
  My gracious Saviour I should meet,
  And he should say, "As I love thee,
  What love hast thou to offer me?"
  Then what could this poor heart of mine
  Dare offer to that heart divine?

  His eye would pierce my outward show,
  His thought my inmost thought would know;
  And if I said, "I love thee, Lord,"
  He would not heed my spoken word,
  Because my daily life would tell
  If verily I loved him well.

  If on the day or in the place
  Wherein he met me face to face,
  My life could show some kindness done,
  Some purpose formed, some work begun
  For his dear sake, then it were meet
  Love's gift to lay at Jesus' feet.

CHARLES FRANCIS RICHARDSON.




IV.

SABBATH: WORSHIP: CREED.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUNDAY MORNING BELLS.


  From the near city comes the clang of bells:
  Their hundred jarring diverse tones combine
  In one faint misty harmony, as fine
  As the soft note yon winter robin swells.
  What if to Thee in thine infinity
  These multiform and many-colored creeds
  Seem but the robe man wraps as masquers' weeds
  Round the one living truth them givest him--Thee?
  What if these varied forms that worship prove,
  Being heart-worship, reach thy perfect ear
  But as a monotone, complete and clear,
  Of which the music is, through Christ's name, love?
  Forever rising in sublime increase
  To "Glory in the highest,--on earth peace"?

DINAH M. MULOCK CRAIK.


       *       *       *       *       *

SABBATH HYMN ON THE MOUNTAINS.


         Praise ye the Lord!
  Not in the temple of shapeliest mould,
  Polished with marble and gleaming with gold,
  Piled upon pillars of slenderest grace,
  But here in the blue sky's luminous face,
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Not where the organ's melodious wave
  Dies 'neath the rafters that narrow the nave,
  But here with the free wind's wandering sweep,
  Here with the billow that booms from the deep,
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Not where the pale-faced multitude meet
  In the sweltering lane and the dun-visaged street,
  But here where bright ocean, thick sown with green isles,
  Feeds the glad eye with a harvest of smiles,
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Here where the strength of the old granite Ben
  Towers o'er the greenswarded grace of the glen,
  Where the birch flings its fragrance abroad on the hill,
  And the bee of the heather-bloom wanders at will,
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Here where the loch, the dark mountain's fair daughter,
  Down the red scaur flings the white-streaming water,
  Leaping and tossing and swirling forever,
  Down to the bed of the smooth-rolling river,
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Not where the voice of a preacher instructs you,
  Not where the hand of a mortal conducts you,
  But where the bright welkin in scripture of glory
  Blazons creation's miraculous story.
         Praise ye the Lord!

         Praise ye the Lord!
  The wind and the welkin, the sun and the river,
  Weaving a tissue of wonders forever;
  The mead and the mountain, the flower and the tree,
  What is their pomp, but a vision of thee,
         Wonderful Lord?

         Praise ye the Lord!
  Not in the square-hewn, many-tiered pile,
  Not in the long-drawn, dim-shadowed aisle,
  But where the bright world, with age never hoary,
  Flashes her brightness and thunders his glory,
         Praise ye the Lord!

JOHN STUART BLACKIE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SABBATH MORNING.


  With silent awe I hail the sacred morn,
  That slowly wakes while all the fields are still!
  A soothing calm on every breeze is borne;
  A graver murmur gurgles from the rill;
  And echo answers softer from the hill;
  And sweeter sings the linnet from the thorn:
  The skylark warbles in a tone less shrill.
  Hail, light serene! hail, sacred Sabbath morn!
  The rooks float silent by in airy drove;
  The sun a placid yellow lustre throws;
  The gales that lately sighed along the grove
  Have hushed their downy wings in dead repose
  The hovering rack of clouds forgets to move,--
  So smiled that day when the first morn arose!

JOHN LEYDEN.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE POOR MAN'S DAY.

    FROM "THE SABBATH."


  How still the morning of the hallowed day!
  Mute is the voice of rural labor, hushed
  The ploughboy's whistle and the milkmaid's song.
  The scythe lies glittering in the dewy wreath
  Of tedded grass, mingled with faded flowers,
  That yestermorn bloomed waving in the breeze;
  Sounds the most faint attract the ear,--the hum
  Of early bee, the trickling of the dew,
  The distant bleating, midway up the hill.
  Calmness sits throned on yon unmoving cloud.
  To him who wanders o'er the upland leas
  The blackbird's note comes mellower from the dale;
  And sweeter from the sky the gladsome lark
  Warbles his heaven-tuned song; the lulling brook
  Murmurs more gently down the deep-worn glen;
  While from yon lowly roof, whose circling smoke
  O'ermounts the mist, is heard at intervals
  The voice of psalms, the simple song of praise.
  With dovelike wings Peace o'er yon village broods;
  The dizzying mill-wheel rests; the anvil's din
  Hath ceased; all, all around is quietness.
  Less fearful on this day, the limping hare
  Stops, and looks back, and stops, and looks on man,
  Her deadliest foe. The toil-worn horse, set free,
  Unheedful of the pasture, roams at large;
  And as his stiff, unwieldy bulk he rolls,
  His iron-armed hoofs gleam in the morning ray.
  But chiefly man the day of rest enjoys.
  Hail, Sabbath! thee I hail, the poor man's day.
  On other days the man of toil is doomed
  To eat his joyless bread, lonely; the ground
  Both seat and board; screened from the winter's cold
  And summer's heat by neighboring hedge or tree;
  But on this day, imbosomed in his home,
  He shares the frugal meal with those he loves;
  With those he loves he shares the heartfelt joy
  Of giving thanks to God--not thanks of form,
  A word and a grimace, but reverently,
  With covered face and upward earnest eye.
    Hail, Sabbath! thee I hail, the poor man's day.
  The pale mechanic now has leave to breathe
  The morning air, pure from the city's smoke;
  While, wandering slowly up the river-side,
  He meditates on Him, whose power he marks
  In each green tree that proudly spreads the bough
  As in the tiny dew-bent flowers that bloom
  Around its roots; and while he thus surveys,
  With elevated joy, each rural charm,
  He hopes, yet fears presumption in the hope,
  That heaven may be one Sabbath without end.

JAMES GRAHAME.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SABBATH OF THE SOUL.


  Sleep, sleep to-day, tormenting cares,
    Of earth and folly born;
  Ye shall not dim the light that streams
    From this celestial morn.

  To-morrow will be time enough
    To feel your harsh control;
  Ye shall not violate, this day,
    The Sabbath of my soul.

  Sleep, sleep forever, guilty thoughts;
    Let fires of vengeance die;
  And, purged from sin, may I behold
    A God of purity!

ANNA LÆTITIA BARBAULD.


       *       *       *       *       *

VESPER HYMN.


  Now, on sea and land descending,
    Brings the night its peace profound:
  Let our vesper hymn be blending
    With the holy calm around.
  Soon as dies the sunset glory,
    Stars of heaven shine out above,
  Telling still the ancient story--
    Their Creator's changeless love.

  Now, our wants and burdens leaving
    To his care who cares for all,
  Cease we fearing, cease we grieving;
    At his touch our burdens fall.
  As the darkness deepens o'er us,
    Lo! eternal stars arise;
  Hope and Faith and Love rise glorious,
    Shining in the Spirit's skies.

SAMUEL LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

VESPER HYMN.


  The day is done; the weary day of thought and toil is past,
  Soft falls the twilight cool and gray on the tired earth at last:
  By wisest teachers wearied, by gentlest friends oppressed,
  In thee alone, the soul, outworn, refreshment finds, and rest.

  Bend, Gracious Spirit, from above, like these o'erarching skies,
  And to thy firmament of love lift up these longing eyes;
  And, folded by thy sheltering hand, in refuge still and deep,
  Let blessed thoughts from thee descend, as drop the dews of sleep.

  And when refreshed the soul once more puts on new life and power;
  Oh, let thine image. Lord, alone, gild the first waking hour!
  Let that dear Presence dawn and glow, fairer than morn's first ray,
  And thy pure radiance overflow the splendor of the day.

  So in the hastening even, so in the coming morn,
  When deeper slumber shall be given, and fresher life be born.
  Shine out, true Light! to guide my way amid that deepening gloom,
  And rise, O Morning Star, the first that dayspring to illume!

  I cannot dread the darkness where thou wilt watch o'er me,
  Nor smile to greet the sunrise unless thy smile I see;
  Creator, Saviour, Comforter! on thee my soul is cast;
  At morn, at night, in earth, in heaven, be thou my First and Last!

ELIZA SCUDDER.


       *       *       *       *       *

AMAZING, BEAUTEOUS CHANGE!


  Amazing, beauteous change!
  A world created new!
  My thoughts with transport range,
  The lovely scene to view;
      In all I trace,
      Saviour divine,
      The word is thine,--
      Be thine the praise!

  See crystal fountains play
  Amidst the burning sands;
  The river's winding way
  Shines through the thirsty lands;
      New grass is seen,
      And o'er the meads
      Its carpet spreads
      Of living green.

  Where pointed brambles grew,
  Intwined with horrid thorn,
  Gay flowers, forever new,
  The painted fields adorn,--
      The blushing rose
      And lily there,
      In union fair,
      Their sweets disclose.

  Where the bleak mountain stood
  All bare and disarrayed,
  See the wide-branching wood
  Diffuse its grateful shade;
      Tall cedars nod,
      And oaks and pines,
      And elms and vines
      Confess thee God.

  The tyrants of the plain
  Their savage chase give o'er,--
  No more they rend the slain,
  And thirst for blood no more;
      But infant hands
      Fierce tigers stroke,
      And lions yoke
      In flowery bands.

  O, when, Almighty Lord!
  Shall these glad things arise,
  To verify thy word,
  And bless our wandering eyes?
      That earth may raise,
      With all its tongues,
      United songs
      Of ardent praise.

PHILIP DODDRIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE WORD.


  O Word of God incarnate,
    O Wisdom from on high,
  O Truth unchanged, unchanging,
    O Light of our dark sky;
  We praise thee for the radiance
    That from the hallowed page,
  A lantern to our footsteps,
    Shines on from age to age.

  The Church from thee, her Master,
    Received the gift divine;
  And still that light she lifteth
    O'er all the earth to shine.
  It is the golden casket
    Where gems of truth are stored;
  It is the heaven-drawn picture
    Of, thee, the living Word.

  It floateth like a banner
    Before God's host unfurled;
  It shineth like a beacon
    Above the darkling world;
  It is the chart and compass
    That o'er life's surging sea,
  Mid mists and rocks and quicksands,
    Still guide, O Christ, to thee.

  Oh, make thy Church, dear Saviour,
    A lamp of burnished gold,
  To bear before the nations
    Thy true light, as of old.
  Oh, teach thy wandering pilgrims
    By this their path to trace,
  Till, clouds and darkness ended,
    They see thee face to face.

WILLIAM WALSHAM HOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHIMES OF ENGLAND.


  The chimes, the chimes of Motherland,
    Of England green and old.
  That out from fane and ivied tower
    A thousand years have tolled;
  How glorious must their music be
    As breaks the hallowed day,
  And calleth with a seraph's voice
    A nation up to pray!

  Those chimes that tell a thousand tales,
    Sweet tales of olden time;
  And ring a thousand memories
    At vesper, and at prime!
  At bridal and at burial,
    For cottager and king,
  Those chimes, those glorious Christian chimes,
    How blessedly they ring!

  Those chimes, those chimes of Motherland,
    Upon a Christmas morn.
  Outbreaking as the angels did,
    For a Redeemer born!
  How merrily they call afar,
    To cot and baron's hall,
  With holly decked and mistletoe,
    To keep the festival!

  The chimes of England, how they peal
    From tower and Gothic pile,
  Where hymn and swelling anthem fill
    The dim cathedral aisle;
  Where windows bathe the holy light
    On priestly heads that falls,
  And stains the florid tracery
    Of banner-dighted walls!

  And then, those Easter bells, in spring,
    Those glorious Easter chimes!
  How loyally they hail thee round,
    Old Queen of holy times!
  From hill to hill like sentinels,
    Responsively they cry,
  And sing the rising of the Lord,
    From vale to mountain high.

  I love ye, chimes of Motherland,
    With all this soul of mine,
  And bless the Lord that I am sprung
    Of good old English line:
  And like a son I sing the lay
    That England's glory tells;
  For she is lovely to the Lord,
    For you, ye Christian bells!

  And heir of her historic fame,
    Though far away my birth,
  Thee, too, I love, my Forest-land,
    The joy of all the earth;
  For thine thy mother's voice shall be,
    And here, where God is king,
  With English chimes, from Christian spires,
    The wilderness shall ring.

ARTHUR CLEVELAND COXE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE OLD VILLAGE CHOIR.


  I have fancied, sometimes, the Bethel-bent beam,
  That trembled to earth in the patriarch's dream,
  Was a ladder of song in that wilderness rest,
  From the pillar of stone to the blue of the blest.
  And the angels descending to dwell with us here,
  "Old Hundred," and "Corinth," and "China," and "Mear."

  "Let us sing to God's praise," the minister said.
  All the psalm-books at once fluttered open at "York";
  Sunned their long dotted wings in the words that he read,
  While the leader leaped into the tune just ahead,
  And politely picked up the key-note with a fork;
  And the vicious old viol went growling along
  At the heels of the girls, in the rear of the song.

  All the hearts are not dead, not under the sod,
  That those breaths can blow open to heaven and God!
  Ah, "Silver Street" flows by a bright shining road,--
  Oh, not to the hymns that in harmony flowed,--
  But the sweet human psalms of the old-fashioned choir,
  To the girl that sang alto--the girl that sang air!

  Oh, I need not a wing--bid no genii come
  With a wonderful web from Arabian loom,
  To bear me again up the river of Time,
  When the world was in rhythm, and life was its rhyme--
  Where the streams of the years flowed so noiseless and narrow,
  That across it there floated the song of the sparrow--

  For a sprig of green caraway carries me there.
  To the old village church, and the old village choir,
  Where clear of the floor my feet slowly swung,
  And timed the sweet pulse of the praise that they sung,
  Till the glory aslant from the afternoon sun
  Seemed the rafters of gold in God's temple begun!

  You may smile at the nasals of old Deacon Brown,
  Who followed by scent, till he ran the tune down;
  And dear Sister Green, with more goodness than grace,
  Rose and fell on the tunes as she stood in her place,
  And where "Coronation" exultingly flows,
  Tried to reach the high notes on the tips of her toes!

  To the land of the leal they have gone with their song,
  Where the choir and the chorus together belong,
  Oh be lifted, ye gates! Let me hear them again--
  Blessèd song, blessèd singers! forever, Amen!

BENJAMIN F. TAYLOR.


       *       *       *       *       *

A LANCASHIRE DOXOLOGY.

    "Some cotton has lately been imported into Farringdon, where
    the mills have been closed for a considerable time. The
    people, who were previously in the deepest distress, went out
    to meet the cotton: the women wept over the bales and kissed
    them, and finally sang the Doxology over them."--_Spectator_
    of May 14, 1803.


  "Praise God from whom all blessings flow,"
  Praise him who sendeth joy and woe.
  The Lord who takes, the Lord who gives,
  O, praise him, all that dies, and lives.

  He opens and he shuts his hand,
  But why we cannot understand:
  Pours and dries up his mercies' flood,
  And yet is still All-perfect Good.

  We fathom not the mighty plan,
  The mystery of God and man;
  We women, when afflictions come,
  We only suffer and are dumb.

  And when, the tempest passing by,
  He gleams out, sunlike through our sky,
  We look up, and through black clouds riven
  We recognize the smile of Heaven.

  Ours is no wisdom of the wise,
  We have no deep philosophies;
  Childlike we take both kiss and rod,
  For he who loveth knoweth God.

DINAH M. MULOCK CRAIK.


       *       *       *       *       *

REBECCA'S HYMN.

    FROM "IVANHOE."


  When Israel, of the Lord beloved,
    Out from the land of bondage came,
  Her fathers' God before her moved,
    An awful guide, in smoke and flame.
  By day, along the astonished lands,
    The cloudy pillar glided slow:
  By night, Arabia's crimsoned sands
    Returned the fiery column's glow.

  There rose the choral hymn of praise,
    And trump and timbrel answered keen,
  And Zion's daughters poured their lays,
    With priest's and warrior's voice between.
  No portents now our foes amaze,
    Forsaken Israel wanders lone:
  Our fathers would not know Thy ways,
    And Thou hast left them to their own.

  But, present still, though now unseen!
    When brightly shines the prosperous day,
  Be thoughts of Thee a cloudy screen
    To temper the deceitful ray.
  And O, when stoops on Judah's path
    In shade and storm the frequent night,
  Be Thou, long-suffering, slow to wrath,
    A burning and a shining light!

  Our harps we left by Babel's streams,
    The tyrant's jest, the Gentile's scorn;
  No censer round our altar beams,
    And mute are timbrel, harp, and horn.
  But Thou hast said, "The blood of goat,
    The flesh of rams, I will not prize;
  A contrite heart, a humble thought,
    Are mine accepted sacrifice."

SIR WALTER SCOTT.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOOK OF GOD.


  Thy thoughts are here, my God,
    Expressed in words divine,
  The utterance of heavenly lips
    In every sacred line.

  Across the ages they
    Have reached us from afar,
  Than the bright gold more golden they,
    Purer than purest star.

  More durable they stand
    Than the eternal hills;
  Far sweeter and more musical
    Than music of earth's rills.

  Fairer in their fair hues
    Than the fresh flowers of earth,
  More fragrant than the fragrant climes
    Where odors have their birth.

  Each word of thine a gem
    From the celestial mines,
  A sunbeam from that holy heaven
    Where holy sunlight shines.

  Thine, thine, this book, though given
    In man's poor human speech,
  Telling of things unseen, unheard,
    Beyond all human reach.

  No strength it craves or needs
    From this world's wisdom vain;
  No filling up from human wells,
    Or sublunary rain.

  No light from sons of time,
    Nor brilliance from its gold;
  It sparkles with its own glad light,
    As in the ages old.

  A thousand hammers keen,
    With fiery force and strain,
  Brought down on it in rage and hate,
    Have struck this gem in vain.

  Against this sea-swept rock
    Ten thousand storms their will
  Of foam and rage have wildly spent;
    It lifts its calm face still.

  It standeth and will stand,
    Without or change or age,
  The word of majesty and light,
    The church's heritage.

HORATIUS BONAR.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MEETING.


  The elder folk shook hands at last,
  Down seat by seat the signal passed.
  To simple ways like ours unused,
  Half solemnized and half amused,
  With long-drawn breath and shrug, my guest
  His sense of glad relief expressed.
  Outside, the hills lay warm in sun;
  The cattle in the meadow-run
  Stood half-leg deep; a single bird
  The green repose above us stirred.
  "What part or lot have you," he said,
  "In these dull rites of drowsy-head?
  Is silence worship? Seek it where
  It soothes with dreams the summer air;
  Not in this close and rude-benched hall,
  But where soft lights and shadows fall,
  And all the slow, sleep-walking hours
  Glide soundless over grass and flowers!
  From time and place and form apart,
  Its holy ground the human heart,
  Nor ritual-bound nor templeward
  Walks the free spirit of the Lord!
  Our common Master did not pen
  His followers up from other men;
  His service liberty indeed,
  He built no church, he framed no creed;
  But while the saintly Pharisee
  Made broader his phylactery,
  As from the synagogue was seen
  The dusty-sandalled Nazarene
  Through ripening cornfields lead the way
  Upon the awful Sabbath day,
  His sermons were the healthful talk
  That shorter made the mountain-walk,
  His wayside texts were flowers and birds,
  Where mingled with his gracious words
  The rustle of the tamarisk-tree
  And ripple-wash of Galilee."

  "Thy words are well, O friend," I said;
  "Unmeasured and unlimited,
  With noiseless slide of stone to stone,
  The mystic Church of God has grown.
  Invisible and silent stands
  The temple never made with hands,
  Unheard the voices still and small
  Of its unseen confessional.
  He needs no special place of prayer
  Whose hearing ear is everywhere;
  He brings not back the childish days
  That ringed the earth with stones of praise,
  Roofed Karnak's hall of gods, and laid
  The plinths of Philae's colonnade.
  Still less he owns the selfish good
  And sickly growth of solitude,--
  The worthless grace that, out of sight,
  Flowers in the desert anchorite;
  Dissevered from the suffering whole,
  Love hath no power to save a soul.
  Not out of Self, the origin
  And native air and soil of sin,
  The living waters spring and flow,
  The trees with leaves of healing grow.

  "Dream not, O friend, because I seek
  This quiet shelter twice a week,
  I better deem its pine-laid floor
  Than breezy hill or sea-sung shore;
  But nature is not solitude;
  She crowds us with her thronging wood;
  Her many hands reach out to us,
  Her many tongues are garrulous;
  Perpetual riddles of surprise
  She offers to our ears and eyes;
  She will not leave our senses still,
  But drags them captive at her will;
  And, making earth too great for heaven,
  She hides the Giver in the given.

  "And so I find it well to come
  For deeper rest to this still room,
  For here the habit of the soul
  Feels less the outer world's control;
  The strength of mutual purpose pleads
  More earnestly our common needs;
  And from the silence multiplied
  By these still forms on either side,
  The world that time and sense have known
  Falls off and leaves us God alone.

  "Yet rarely through the charmed repose
  Unmixed the stream of motive flows,
  A flavor of its many springs,
  The tints of earth and sky it brings;
  In the still waters needs must be
  Some shade of human sympathy;
  And here, in its accustomed place,
  I look on memory's dearest face;
  The blind by-sitter guesseth not
  What shadow haunts that vacant spot;
  No eyes save mine alone can see
  The love wherewith it welcomes me!
  And still, with those alone my kin,
  In doubt and weakness, want and sin,
  I bow my head, my heart I bare
  As when that face was living there,
  And strive (too oft, alas! in vain)
  The peace of simple trust to gain,
  Fold fancy's restless wings, and lay
  The idols of my heart away.

  "Welcome the silence all unbroken,
  Nor less the words of fitness spoken,--
  Such golden words as hers for whom
  Our autumn flowers have just made room;
  Whose hopeful utterance through and through
  The freshness of the morning blew;
  Who loved not less the earth that light
  Fell on it from the heavens in sight,
  But saw in all fair forms more fair
  The Eternal beauty mirrored there.
  Whose eighty years but added grace
  And saintlier meaning to her face,--
  The look of one who bore away
  Glad tidings from the hills of day,
  While all our hearts went forth to meet
  The coming of her beautiful feet!
  Or haply hers whose pilgrim tread
  Is in the paths where Jesus led;
  Who dreams her childhood's Sabbath dream
  By Jordan's willow-shaded stream,
  And, of the hymns of hope and faith,
  Sang by the monks of Nazareth,
  Hears pious echoes, in the call
  To prayer, from Moslem minarets fall,
  Repeating where His works were wrought
  The lesson that her Master taught,
  Of whom an elder Sibyl gave,
  The prophecies of Cumae's cave!

  "I ask no organ's soulless breath
  To drone the themes of life and death,
  No altar candle-lit by day,
  No ornate wordsman's rhetoric-play,
  No cool philosophy to teach
  Its bland audacities of speech
  To double-tasked idolaters,
  Themselves their gods and worshippers,
  No pulpit hammered by the fist
  Of loud-asserting dogmatist,
  Who borrows for the hand of love
  The smoking thunderbolts of Jove.
  I know how well the fathers taught,
  What work the later schoolmen wrought;
  I reverence old-time faith and men,
  But God is near us now as then;
  His force of love is still unspent,
  His hate of sin as imminent;
  And still the measure of our needs
  Outgrows the cramping bounds of creeds;
  The manna gathered yesterday
  Already savors of decay;
  Doubts to the world's child-heart unknown
  Question us now from star and stone;
  Too little or too much we know,
  And sight is swift and faith is slow;
  The power is lost to self-deceive
  With shallow forms of make-believe.
  We walk at high noon, and the bells
  Call to a thousand oracles,
  But the sound deafens, and the light
  Is stronger than our dazzled sight;
  The letters of the sacred Book
  Glimmer and swim beneath our look;
  Still struggles in the Age's breast
  With deepening agony of quest
  The old entreaty: 'Art thou He,
  Or look we for the Christ to be?'

  "God should be most where man is least;
  So, where is neither church nor priest,
  And never rag of form or creed
  To clothe the nakedness of need,--
  Where farmer-folk in silence meet,--
  I turn my bell-unsummoned feet;
  I lay the critic's glass aside,
  I tread upon my lettered pride,
  And, lowest-seated, testify
  To the oneness of humanity;
  Confess the universal want,
  And share whatever Heaven may grant.
  He findeth not who seeks his own,
  The soul is lost that's saved alone.
  Not on one favored forehead fell
  Of old the fire-tongued miracle,
  But flamed o'er all the thronging host
  The baptism of the Holy Ghost;
  Heart answers heart: in one desire
  The blending lines of prayer aspire;
  'Where, in my name, meet two or three,'
  Our Lord hath said, 'I there will be!'

  "So sometimes comes to soul and sense
  The feeling which is evidence
  That very near about us lies
  The realm of spiritual mysteries.
  The sphere of the supernal powers
  Impinges on this world of ours.
  The low and dark horizon lifts,
  To light the scenic terror shifts;
  The breath of a diviner air
  Blows down the answer of a prayer:--
  That all our sorrow, pain, and doubt
  A great compassion clasps about,
  And law and goodness, love and force,
  Are wedded fast beyond divorce.
  Then duty leaves to love its task,
  The beggar Self forgets to ask;
  With smile of trust and folded hands,
  The passive soul in waiting stands
  To feel, as flowers the sun and dew,
  The One true Life its own renew.

  "So, to the calmly gathered thought
  The innermost of truth is taught,
  The mystery dimly understood,
  That love of God is love of good,
  And, chiefly, its divinest trace
  In Him of Nazareth's holy face;
  That to be saved is only this,--
  Salvation from our selfishness,
  From more than elemental fire,
  The soul's unsanctified desire,
  From sin itself, and not the pain
  That warns us of its chafing chain;
  That worship's deeper meaning lies
  In mercy, and not sacrifice,
  Not proud humilities of sense
  And posturing of penitence,
  But love's unforced obedience;
  That Book and Church and Day are given
  For man, not God,--for earth, not heaven,--
  The blessed means to holiest ends,
  Not masters, but benignant friends;
  That the dear Christ dwells not afar,
  The king of some remoter star,
  Listening, at times, with flattered ear,
  To homage wrung from selfish fear,
  But here, amidst the poor and blind,
  The bound and suffering of our kind,
  In works we do, in prayers we pray,
  Life of our life, He lives to-day."

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LIVING TEMPLE.


  Nor in the world of light alone,
  Where God has built his blazing throne,
  Nor yet alone in earth below,
  With belted seas that come and go,
  And endless isles of sunlit green,
  Is all thy Maker's glory seen:
  Look in upon thy wondrous frame,--
  Eternal wisdom still the same!

  The smooth, soft air with pulse-like waves
  Flows murmuring through its hidden caves,
  Whose streams of brightening purple rush,
  Fired with a new and livelier blush,
  While all their burden of decay
  The ebbing current steals away,
  And red with Nature's flame they start
  From the warm fountains of the heart.

  No rest that throbbing slave may ask,
  Forever quivering o'er his task,
  While far and wide a crimson jet
  Leaps forth to fill the woven net
  Which in unnumbered crossing tides
  The flood of burning life divides,
  Then, kindling each decaying part,
  Creeps back to find the throbbing heart.

  But warmed with that unchanging flame
  Behold the outward moving frame,
  Its living marbles jointed strong
  With glistening band and silvery thong,
  And linked to reason's guiding reins
  By myriad rings in trembling chains,
  Each graven with the threaded zone
  Which claims it as the Master's own.

  See how yon beam of seeming white
  Is braided out of seven-hued light,
  Yet in those lucid globes no ray
  By any chance shall break astray.
  Hark, how the rolling surge of sound,
  Arches and spirals circling round,
  Wakes the hushed spirit through thine ear
  With music it is heaven to hear.

  Then mark the cloven sphere that holds
  All thought in its mysterious folds,
  That feels sensation's faintest thrill,
  And flashes forth the sovereign will;
  Think on the stormy world that dwells
  Locked in its dim and clustering cells!
  The lightning gleams of power it sheds
  Along its hollow glassy threads!

  O Father! grant thy love divine
  To make these mystic temples thine!
  When wasting age and wearying strife
  Have sapped the leaning walls of life,
  When darkness gathers over all,
  And the last tottering pillars-fall,
  Take the poor dust thy mercy warms,
  And mould it into heavenly forms!

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.


       *       *       *       *       *

OF HYM THAT TOGYDER WYLL SERVE TWO MAYSTERS.


  A Fole he is and voyde of reason
  Whiche with one hounde tendyth to take
  Two harys in one instant and season;
  Rightso is he that wolde undertake
  Hym to two lordes a servaunt to make;
  For whether that he be lefe or lothe,
  The one he shall displease, or els bothe.

  A fole also he is withouten doute,
  And in his porpose sothly blyndyd sore,
  Which doth entende labour or go aboute
  To serve god, and also his wretchyd store
  Of worldly ryches: for as I sayde before,
  He that togyder will two maysters serve
  Shall one displease and nat his love deserve.

  For be that with one hounde wol take also
  Two harys togyther in one instant
  For the moste parte doth the both two forgo,
  And if he one have: harde it is and skant
  And that blynd fole mad and ignorant
  That draweth thre boltis atons[A] in one bowe
  At one marke shall shote to[o] high or to[o] lowe.
  He that his mynde settyth god truly to serve
  And his sayntes: this worlde settynge at nought
  Shall for rewarde everlastynge joy deserve,
  But in this worlde he that settyth his thought
  All men to please, and in favour to be brought,
  Must lout and lurke, flater, laude, and lye:
  And cloke in knavys counseyll, though it fals be.

  Wherfore I may prove by these examples playne
  That it is better more godly and plesant
  To leve this mondayne casualte and payne
  And to thy maker one god to be servaunt.
  Which whyle thou lyvest shall nat let the want
  That thou desyrest justly, for thy syrvyce,
  And than after gyve the, the joyes of Paradyse.

From the German of SEBASTIAN BRANDT.

Translation of ALEXANDER BARCLAY.

[Footnote A: At once.]


       *       *       *       *       *

RELIGION AND DOCTRINE.


  He stood before the Sanhedrim;
  The scowling rabbis gazed at him;
  He recked not of their praise or blame;
  There was no fear, there was no shame
  For one upon whose dazzled eyes
  The whole world poured its vast surprise.
  The open heaven was far too near,
  His first day's light too sweet and clear,
  To let him waste his new-gained ken
  On the hate-clouded face of men.

  But still they questioned, Who art thou?
  What hast thou been? What art thou now?
  Thou art not he who yesterday
  Sat here and begged beside the way,
  For he was blind.
                 _And I am he;
  For I was blind, but now I see_.

  He told the story o'er and o'er;
  It was his full heart's only lore;
  A prophet on the Sabbath day
  Had touched his sightless eyes with clay,
  And made him see, who had been blind.
  Their words passed by him like the wind
  Which raves and howls, but cannot shock
  The hundred-fathom-rooted rock.

  Their threats and fury all went wide;
  They could not touch his Hebrew pride;
  Their sneers at Jesus and his band,
  Nameless and homeless in the land,
  Their boasts of Moses and his Lord,
  All could not change him by one word.

  _I know not that this man may be,
  Sinner or saint; but as for me,
  One thing I know, that I am he
  Who once was blind, and now I see_.

  They were all doctors of renown,
  The great men of a famous town,
  With deep brows, wrinkled, broad, and wise,
  Beneath their wide phylacteries;
  The wisdom of the East was theirs,
  And honor crowned their silver hairs;
  The man they jeered and laughed to scorn
  Was unlearned, poor, and humbly born;
  But he knew better far than they
  What came to him that Sabbath day;
  And what the Christ had done for him,
  He knew, and not the Sanhedrim.

JOHN HAY.


       *       *       *       *       *

RABBI BEN EZRA.


    Grow old along with me!
    The best is yet to be,
  The last of life, for which the first I was made:
    Our times are in his hand
    Who saith "A whole I planned
  Youth shows but half; trust God: see all, nor be afraid!"

    Not that, amassing flowers,
    Youth sighed, "Which rose make ours,
  Which lily leave and then as best recall?"
    Not that, admiring stars,
    It yearned, "Nor Jove, nor Mars;
  Mine be some figured flame which blends, transcends them all!"

    Not for such hopes and fears,
    Annulling youth's brief years,
  Do I remonstrate--folly wide the mark!
    Rather I prize the doubt
    Low kinds exist without,
  Finished and finite clods, untroubled by a spark.

    Poor vaunt of life indeed,
    Were man but formed to feed
  On joy, to solely seek and find and feast:
    Such feasting ended, then
    As sure an end to men;
  Irks care the crop-full bird? Frets doubt the maw-crammed beast?

    Rejoice we are allied
    To That which doth provide
  And not partake, effect and not receive!
    A spark disturbs our clod;
    Nearer we hold of God
  Who gives, than of His tribes that take, I must believe.

    Then, welcome each rebuff
    That turns earth's smoothness rough,
  Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go!
    Be our joys three parts pain!
    Strive, and hold cheap the strain;
  Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the throe!

    For thence--a paradox
    Which comforts while it mocks--
  Shall life succeed in that it seems to fail:
    What I aspired to be,
    And was not, comforts me:
  A brute I might have been, but would not sink i' the scale.

    What is he but a brute
    Whose flesh hath soul to suit,
  Whose spirit works lest arms and legs want play?
    To man, propose this test--
    Thy body at its best,
  How far can that project thy soul on its lone way?

    Yet gifts should prove their use:
    I own the Past profuse
  Of power each side, perfection every turn:
    Eyes, ears took in their dole,
    Brain treasured up the whole;
  Should not the heart beat once, "How good to live and learn?"

    Not once beat "Praise be Thine!
    I see the whole design,
  I, who saw Power, shall see Love perfect too:
    Perfect I call Thy plan:
    Thanks that I was a man!
  Maker, remake, complete--I trust what Thou shalt do!"

    For pleasant is this flesh;
    Our soul, in its rose-mesh
  Pulled ever to the earth, still yearns for rest:
    Would we some prize might hold
    To match those manifold
  Possessions of the brute--gain most, as we did best!

    Let us not always say,
    "Spite of this flesh to-day.
  I strove, made head, gained ground upon the whole!"
    As the bird wings and sings,
    Let us cry, "All good things
  Are ours, nor soul helps flesh more, now, than flesh helps soul!"

    Therefore I summon age
    To grant youth's heritage,
  Life's struggle having so far reached its term:
    Thence shall I pass, approved
    A man, for aye removed
  From the developed brute; a God though in the germ.

    And I shall thereupon
    Take rest, ere I be gone
  Once more on my adventure brave and new:
    Fearless and unperplexed,
    When I wage battle next,
  What weapons to select, what armor to indue.

    Youth ended, I shall try
    My gain or loss thereby;
  Be the fire ashes, what survives is gold:
    And I shall weigh the same.
    Give life its praise or blame:
  Young, all lay in dispute; I shall know, being old.

    For note, when evening shuts,
    A certain moment cuts
  The deed off, calls the glory from the gray:
    A whisper from the west
    Shoots--"Add this to the rest,
  Take it and try its worth: here dies another day."

    So, still within this life,
    Though lifted o'er its strife,
  Let me discern, compare, pronounce at last,
    "This rage was right i' the main,
    That acquiescence vain:
  The Future I may face now I have proved the Past."

    For more is not reserved
    To man, with soul just nerved
  To act to-morrow what he learns to-day:
    Here, work enough to watch
    The Master work, and catch
  Hints of the proper craft, tricks of the tool's true play.
    As it was better, youth
    Should strive, through acts uncouth,
  Toward making, than repose on aught found made;
    So, better, age, exempt
    From strife, should know, than tempt
  Further. Thou waitedst age; wait death nor be afraid!

    Enough now, if the Right
    And Good and Infinite
  Be named here, as thou callest thy hand thine own,
    With knowledge absolute,
    Subject to no dispute
  From fools that crowded youth, nor let thee feel alone.

    Be there, for once and all,
    Severed great minds from small,
  Announced to each his station in the Past!
    Was I, the world arraigned,
    Were they, my soul disdained,
  Right? Let age speak the truth and give us peace at last!

    Now, who shall arbitrate?
    Ten men love what I hate,
  Shun what I follow, slight what I receive:
    Ten, who in ears and eyes
    Match me: we all surmise,
  They, this thing, and I, that: whom shall my soul believe?

    Not on the vulgar mass
    Called "work," must sentence pass,
  Things done, that took the eye and had the price;
    O'er which, from level stand,
    The low world laid its hand,
  Found straightway to its mind, could value in a trice:

    But all, the world's coarse thumb
   And finger failed to plumb,
  So passed in making up the main account;
    All instincts immature,
    All purposes unsure,
  That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man's amount:

    Thoughts hardly to be packed
    Into a narrow act,
  Fancies that broke through language and escaped;
    All I could never be,
    All, men ignored in me,
  This, I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher shaped.

    Ay, note that Potter's wheel,
    That metaphor! and feel
  Why time spins fast; why passive lies our clay,--
    Thou, to whom fools propound,
    When the wine makes its round,
  "Since life fleets, all is change; the Past gone, seize to-day!"

    Fool! All that is, at all,
    Lasts ever, past recall;
  Earth changes, but thy soul and God stand sure:
    What entered into thee,
    _That_ was, is, and shall be:
  Time's wheel runs back or stops; Potter and clay endure.

    He fixed thee 'mid this dance
    Of plastic circumstance,
  This Present, thou, forsooth, wouldst fain arrest:
    Machinery just meant
    To give thy soul its bent,
  Try thee and turn thee forth, sufficiently impressed.

    What though the earlier grooves
    Which ran the laughing loves
  Around thy base, no longer pause and press?
    What though, about thy rim,
    Scull-things in order grim
  Grow out, in graver mood, obey the sterner stress?

    Look not thou down, but up!
    To uses of a cup,
  The festal board, lamp's flash, and trumpet's peal,
    The new wine's foaming flow,
    The Master's lips aglow!
  Thou, heaven's consummate cup, what needst thou with earth's wheel?

    But I need, now as then,
    Thee, God, who mouldest men;
  And since, not even while the whirl was worst,
    Did I--to the wheel of life
    With shapes and colors rife,
  Bound dizzily--mistake my end, to slake Thy thirst:

    So, take and use Thy work!
    Amend what flaws may lurk,
  What strain o' the stuff, what warpings past the aim!
    My times be in _Thy_ hand!
    Perfect the cup as planned!
  Let age approve of youth, and death complete the same!

ROBERT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE RELIGION OF HUDIBRAS.

    FROM "HUDIBRAS," PART I.


    He was of that stubborn crew
  Of errant saints, whom all men grant
  To be the true church militant;
  Such as do build their faith upon
  The holy text of pike and gun;
  Decide all controversies by
  Infallible artillery,
  And prove their doctrine orthodox
  By apostolic blows and knocks;
  Call fire, and sword, and desolation
  A godly, thorough Reformation,
  Which always must be carried on
  And still be doing, never done;
  As if religion were intended
  For nothing else but to be mended.
  A sect whose chief devotion lies
  In odd perverse antipathies;
  In falling out with that or this,
  And finding somewhat still amiss;
  More peevish, cross, and splenetic,
  Than dog distract, or monkey sick;
  That with more care keep holiday
  The wrong than others the right way;
  Compound for sins they are inclined to,
  By damning those they have no mind to;
  Still so perverse and opposite,
  As if they worshipped God for spite;
  The self-same thing they will abhor
  One way, and long another for.

SAMUEL BUTLER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROBLEM.


    I like a church; I like a cowl;
  I love a prophet of the soul;
  And on my heart monastic aisles
  Fall like sweet strains or pensive smiles;
  Yet not for all his faith can see
  Would I that cowled churchman be.
  Why should the vest on him allure,
  Which I could not on me endure?

    Not from a vain or shallow thought
  His awful Jove young Phidias brought;
  Never from lips of cunning fell
  The thrilling Delphic oracle:
  Out from the heart of nature rolled
  The burdens of the Bible old;
  The litanies of nations came,
  Like the volcano's tongue of flame,
  Up from the burning core below,--
  The canticles of love and woe.
  The hand that rounded Peters dome,
  And groined the aisles of Christian Rome,
  Wrought in a sad sincerity;
  Himself from God he could not free;
  He builded better than he knew;--
  The conscious stone to beauty grew.

    Knowest thou what wove yon woodbird's nest
  Of leaves, and feathers from her breast?
  Or how the fish outbuilt her shell.
  Painting with morn each annual cell?
  Or how the sacred pine-tree adds
  To her old leaves new myriads?
  Such and so grew these holy piles,
  Whilst love and terror laid the tiles.
  Earth proudly wears the Parthenon,
  As the best gem upon her zone;
  And Morning opes with haste her lids,
  To gaze upon the Pyramids;
  O'er England's abbeys bends the sky,
  As on its friends, with kindred eye;
  For, out of Thought's interior sphere,
  These wonders rose to upper air;
  And Nature gladly gave them place,
  Adopted them into her race,
  And granted them an equal date
  With Andes and with Ararat.

    These temples grew as grows the grass;
  Art might obey, but not surpass.
  The passive Master lent his hand
  To the vast Soul that o'er him planned;
  And the same power that reared the shrine
  Bestrode the tribes that knelt within.
  Ever the fiery Pentecost
  Girds with one flame the countless host,
  Trances the heart through chanting choirs,
  And through the priest the mind inspires.
  The word unto the prophet spoken
  Was writ on tables yet unbroken;
  The word by seers or sibyls told,
  In groves of oak, or fanes of gold,
  Still floats upon the morning wind,
  Still whispers to the willing mind.
  One accent of the Holy Ghost
  The heedless world hath never lost.
  I know what say the fathers wise,--
  The Book itself before me lies,--
  Old Chrysostom, best Augustine,
  And he who blent both in his line,
  The younger Golden Lips or mines,
  Taylor, the Shakespeare of divines.
  His words are music in my ear,
  I see his cowled portrait dear;
  And yet, for all his faith could see,
  I would not the good bishop be.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

ON AN INFANT

    WHICH DIED BEFORE BAPTISM.


  "Be, rather than be called, a child of God,"
  Death whispered!--with assenting nod,
  Its head upon its mother's breast,
      The baby bowed, without demur--
  Of the kingdom of the Blest
      Possessor, not inheritor.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

WHAT WAS HIS CREED?

    "Religion relates to life, and the life of religion is to do
    good."--SWEDENBORG.


  He left a load of anthracite
    In front of a poor woman's door.
  When the deep snow, frozen and white,
    Wrapped street and square, mountain and moor.
        That was his deed.
          He did it well.
        "What was his creed?"
          I cannot tell.

  Blessed "in his basket and his store,"
    In sitting down and rising up;
  When more he got, he gave the more,
    Withholding not the crust and cup.
        He took the lead
          In each good task.
        "What was his creed?"
          I did not ask.

  His charity was like the snow,
    Soft, white, and silent in its fall;
  Not like the noisy winds that blow
    From shivering trees the leaves,--a pall
        For flowers and weed,
          Drooping below.
        "What was his creed?"
          The poor may know.

  He had great faith in loaves of bread
    For hungry people, young and old,
  Hope he inspired; kind words he said
    To those he sheltered from the cold.
        For we should feed
          As well as pray.
        "What was his creed?"
          I cannot say.

  In words he did not put his trust;
    His faith in words he never writ;
  He loved to share his cup and crust
    With all mankind who needed it.
        In time of need
          A friend was he.
        "What was his creed?"
          He told not me.

  He put his trust in heaven, and he
    Worked well with hand and head;
  And what he gave in charity
    Sweetened his sleep and daily bread.
        Let us take heed,
          For life is brief.
        What was his creed--What
          his belief?

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE PHILOSOPHER TOAD.


    Down deep in the hollow, so damp and so cold,
      Where oaks are by ivy o'ergrown,
    The gray moss and lichen creep over the mould,
      Lying loose on a ponderous stone.
    Now within this huge stone, like a king on his throne,
    A toad has been sitting more years than is known;
    And, strange as it seems, yet he constantly deems
    The world standing still while he's dreaming his dreams,--
    Does this wonderful toad in his cheerful abode
  In the innermost heart of that flinty old stone,
  By the gray-haired moss and the lichen o'ergrown.

    Down deep in the hollow, from morning till night,
    Dun shadows glide over the ground,
    Where a watercourse once, as it sparkled with light,
      Turned a ruined old mill-wheel around:
    Long years have passed by since its bed became dry,
    And the trees grow so close, scarce a glimpse of the sky
    Is seen in the hollow, so dark and so damp,
    Where the glow-worm at noonday is trimming his lamp,
    And hardly a sound from the thicket around,
    Where the rabbit and squirrel leap over the ground,
    Is heard by the toad in his spacious abode
  In the innermost heart of that ponderous stone,
  By the gray-haired moss and the lichen o'ergrown.

    Down deep in that hollow the bees never come,
      The shade is too black for a flower;
    And jewel-winged birds with their musical hum,
      Never flash in the night of that bower;
    But the cold-blooded snake, in the edge of the brake,
    Lies amid the rank grass, half asleep, half awake;
    And the ashen-white snail, with the slime in, its trail,
    Moves wearily on like a life's tedious tale,
    Yet disturbs not the toad in his spacious abode,
  In the innermost heart of that flinty old stone,
  By the gray-haired moss and the lichen o'ergrown.

    Down deep in a hollow some wiseacres sit,
      Like a toad in his cell in the stone;
    Around them in daylight the blind owlets flit,
      And their creeds are with ivy o'ergrown;--
    Their stream may go dry, and the wheels cease to ply,
    And their glimpses be few of the sun and the sky,
    Still they hug to their breast every time-honored guest.
    And slumber and doze in inglorious rest;
    For no progress they find in the wide sphere of mind,
    And the world's standing still with all of their kind;
    Contented to dwell deep down in the well,
    Or move like a snail in the crust of his shell,
    Or live like the toad in his narrow abode,
  With their souls closely wedged in a thick wall of stone,
  By the gray weeds of prejudice rankly o'ergrown.

REBECCA S. NICHOLS.


       *       *       *       *       *

HER CREED.


  She stood before a chosen few,
  With modest air and eyes of blue;
  A gentle creature, in whose face
  Were mingled tenderness and grace.

  "You wish to join our fold," they said:
  "Do you believe in all that's read
  From ritual and written creed,
  Essential to our human need?"

  A troubled look was in her eyes;
  She answered, as in vague surprise.
  As though the sense to her were dim,
  "I only strive to follow Him."

  They knew her life; how, oft she stood,
  Sweet in her guileless maidenhood,
  By dying bed, in hovel lone,
  Whose sorrow she had made her own.

  Oft had her voice in prayer been heard,
  Sweet as the voice of singing bird;
  Her hand been open in distress;
  Her joy to brighten and to bless.

  Yet still she answered, when they sought
  To know her inmost earnest thought,
  With look as of the seraphim,
  "I only strive to follow Him."

  Creeds change as ages come and go;
  We see by faith, but little know:
  Perchance the sense was not so dim
  To her who "strove to follow Him."

SARAH KNOWLES BOLTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY CREED.


  I hold that Christian grace abounds
    Where charity is seen; that when
  We climb to heaven, 't is on the rounds
    Of love to men.

  I hold all else, named piety,
    A selfish scheme, a vain pretence;
  Where centre is not--can there be
    Circumference?

  This I moreover hold, and dare
    Affirm where'er my rhyme may go,--
  Whatever things be sweet or fair,
    Love makes them so.

  Whether it be the lullabies
    That charm to rest the nursling bird,
  Or the sweet confidence of sighs
    And blushes, made without a word.

  Whether the dazzling and the flush
    Of softly sumptuous garden bowers,
  Or by some cabin door, a bush
    Of ragged flowers.

  'Tis not the wide phylactery,
    Nor stubborn fast, nor stated prayers,
  That make us saints: we judge the tree
    By what it bears.

  And when a man can live apart
    From works, on theologic trust,
  I know the blood about his heart
    Is dry as dust.

ALICE CAREY.


       *       *       *       *       *

GIVE ME THY HEART.


  With echoing steps the worshippers
    Departed one by one;
  The organ's pealing voice was stilled,
    The vesper hymn was done;
  The shadow fell from roof and arch,
    Dim was the incensed air,
  One lamp alone, with trembling ray,
    Told of the Presence there!

  In the dark church she knelt alone;
    Her tears were falling fast;
  "Help, Lord," she cried, "the shades of death
    Upon my soul are cast!
  Have I not shunned the path of sin,
    And chose the better part? "--
  What voice came through the sacred air?--
  _"My child, give me thy heart!"_

  "Have not I laid before thy shrine
    My wealth, O Lord?" she cried;
  "Have I kept aught of gems or gold,
    To minister to pride?
  Have I not bade youth's joys retire,
    And vain delights depart?"--
  But sad and tender was the voice,--
    _"My child, give me thy heart!"_

  "Have I not, Lord, gone day by day
    Where thy poor children dwell;
  And carried help, and gold, and food?
    O Lord, thou know'st it well!
  From many a house, from many a soul,
    My hand bids care depart":--
  More sad, more tender was the voice,--
    _"My child, give me thy heart!"_

  "Have I not worn my strength away
    With fast and penance sore?
  Have I not watched and wept?" she cried;
    "Did thy dear saints do more?
  Have I not gained thy grace, O Lord,
    And won in heaven my part?"--
  It echoed louder in her soul,--
    "_My child, give me thy heart_!

  "For I have loved thee with a love
    No mortal heart can show;
  A love so deep my saints in heaven
    Its depths can never know:
  When pierced and wounded on the cross,
    Man's sin and doom were mine,
  I loved thee with undying love,
    Immortal and divine!

  "I loved thee ere the skies were spread;
    My soul bears all thy pains;
  To gain thy love my sacred heart
    In earthly shrines remains:
  Vain are thy offerings, vain thy sighs,
    Without one gift divine;
  Give it, my child, thy heart to me,
    And it shall rest in mine!"

  In awe she listened, as the shade
    Passed from her soul away;
  In low and trembling voice she cried,--
    "Lord, help me to obey!
  Break thou the chains of earth, O Lord,
    That bind and hold my heart;
  Let it be thine and thine alone,
    Let none with thee have part.

  "Send down, O Lord, thy sacred fire!
    Consume and cleanse the sin
  That lingers still within its depths:
    Let heavenly love begin.
  That sacred flame thy saints have known,
    Kindle, O Lord, in me,
  Thou above all the rest forever,
    And all the rest in thee."

  The blessing fell upon her soul;
    Her angel by her side
  Knew that the hour of peace was come;
    Her soul was purified;
  The shadows fell from roof and arch,
  Dim was the incensed air,--
    But peace went with her as she left
  The sacred Presence there!

ADELAIDE ANNE PROCTOR.


       *       *       *       *       *

O, MAY I JOIN THE CHOIR INVISIBLE!


  O, may I join the choir invisible
  Of those immortal dead who live again
  In minds made better by their presence; live
  In pulses stirred to generosity,
  In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
  Of miserable aims that end with self,
  In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
  And with their mild persistence urge men's minds
  To vaster issues.
                So to live is heaven:
  To make undying music in the world,
  Breathing a beauteous order that controls
  With growing sway the growing life of man.
  So we inherit that sweet purity
  For which we struggled, failed, and agonized
  With widening retrospect that bred despair.
  Rebellious flesh that would not be subdued,
  A vicious parent shaming still its child,
  Poor anxious penitence, is quick dissolved;
  Its discords quenched by meeting harmonies,
  Die in the large and charitable air.
  And all our rarer, better, truer self,
  That sobbed religiously in yearning song,
  That watched to ease the burden of the world,
  Laboriously tracing what must be,
  And what may yet be better,--saw within
  A worthier image for the sanctuary,
  And shaped it forth before the multitude,
  Divinely human, raising worship so
  To higher reverence more mixed with love,
  That better self shall live till human Time
  Shall fold its eyelids, and the human sky
  Be gathered like a scroll within the tomb,
  Unread forever.
                This is life to come,
  Which martyred men have made more glorious
  For us, who strive to follow.
                May I reach
  That purest heaven,--be to other souls
  The cup of strength in some great agony,
  Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
  Beget the smiles that have no cruelty,
  Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
  And in diffusion ever more intense!
  So shall I join the choir invisible,
  Whose music is the gladness of the world.

MARIAN EVANS LEWES CROSS (_George Eliot_).


       *       *       *       *       *

O YET WE TRUST THAT SOMEHOW GOOD.

    FROM "IN MEMORIAM," LIII.


  O yet we trust that somehow good
    Will be the final goal of ill,
    To pangs of nature, sins of will,
  Defects of doubt, and taints of blood;

  That nothing walks with aimless feet;
    That not one life shall be destroyed,
    Or cast as rubbish to the void,
  When God hath made the pile complete;

  That not a worm is cloven in vain;
    That not a moth with vain desire
    Is shrivelled in a fruitless fire,
  Or but subserves another's gain.

  Behold, we know not anything;
    I can but trust that good shall fall
    At last--far off--at last, to all,
  And every winter change to spring.

  So runs my dream: but what am I?
    An infant crying in the night:
    An infant crying for the light:
  And with no language but a cry.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

DAY BREAKS.


  What dost thou see, lone watcher on the tower.
  Is the day breaking? Comes the wished-for hour?
  Tell us the signs, and stretch abroad thy hand,
  If the bright morning dawns upon the land.

  "The stars are clear above me; scarcely one
  Has dimmed its rays in reverence to the sun;
  But I yet see on the horizon's verge
  Some fair, faint streaks, as if the light would surge."

  Look forth again, O watcher on the tower,--
  The people wake and languish for the hour;
  Long have they dwelt in darkness, and they pine
  For the full daylight that they know must shine.

  "I see not well,--the moon is cloudy still,--
  There is a radiance on the distant hill;
  Even as I watch the glory seems to grow;
  But the stars blink, and the night breezes blow."

  And is that all, O watcher on the tower?
  Look forth again; it must be near the hour;
  Dost thou not see the snowy mountain copes,
  And the green woods beneath them on the slopes?

  "A mist envelops them; I cannot trace
  Their outline; but the day comes on apace:
  The clouds roll up in gold and amber flakes,
  And all the stars grow dim; the morning breaks."

  We thank thee, lonely watcher on the tower:
  But look again, and tell us, hour by hour,
  All thou beholdest: many of us die
  Ere the day comes; oh, give them a reply!

  "I see the hill-tops now, and chanticleer
  Crows his prophetic carol on mine ear;
  I see the distant woods and fields of corn,
  And ocean gleaming in the light of morn."

  Again, again, O watcher on the tower!
  We thirst for daylight, and we bide the hour,
  Patient, but longing. Tell us, shall it be
  A bright, calm, glorious daylight for the free?

  "I hope, but cannot tell; I hear a song,
  Vivid as day itself, and clear and strong,
  As of a lark--young prophet of the noon--
  Pouring in sunlight his seraphic tune."

  What doth he say, O watcher on the tower?
  Is he a prophet? does the dawning hour
  Inspire his music? Is his chant sublime,
  Filled with the glories of the future time?

  "He prophesies,--his heart is full; his lay
  Tells of the brightness of a peaceful day;
  A day not cloudless, nor devoid of storm,
  But sunny for the most, and clear and warm."

  We thank thee, watcher on the lonely tower,
  For all thou tellest. Sings he of an hour
  When error shall decay, and truth grow strong,
  And light shall rule supreme and conquer wrong?

  "He sings of brotherhood and joy and peace,
  Of days when jealousies and hate shall cease;
  When war shall cease, and man's progressive mind
  Soar as unfettered as its God designed."

  Well done, thou watcher on the lonely tower!
  Is the day breaking? Dawns the happy hour?
  We pine to see it; tell us yet again
  If the broad daylight breaks upon the plain?

  "It breaks! it comes! the misty shadows fly:
  A rosy radiance gleams upon the sky;
  The mountain-tops reflect it calm and clear,
  The plain is yet in shade, but day is near."

CHARLES MACKAY.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY HOME.

    A THANKSGIVING TO GOD FOR A HOUSE IN THE GREEN PARISH OF
    DEVONSHIRE.


  Lord, thou hast given me a cell
      Wherein to dwell,
  A little house, whose humble roof
      Is weather proof;
  Under the sparres of which I lie,
      Both soft and drie;
  Where thou, my chamber for to ward,
      Hast set a guard
  Of harmlesse thoughts, to watch and keep
      Me while I sleep.
  Low is my porch, as is my fate;
      Both void of state;
  And yet the threshold of my doore
      Is worn by the poore,
  Who hither come and freely get
      Good words or meat.
  Like as my parlour, so my hall
      And kitchen's small;
  A little butterie, and therein
      A little byn,
  Which keeps my little loafe of bread
      Unchipt, unflead.
  Some sticks of thorn or briar
      Make me a fire,
  Close by whose loving coals I sit,
      And glow like it.
  Lord, I confesse too, when I dine,
      The pulse is thine,
  And all those other bits that bee
      There placed by thee;
  The worts, the purslain, and the messe
      Of water-cresse,
  Which of thy kindness thou hast sent;
      And my content
  Makes those and my beloved beet
      More sweet.
  'Tis thou that crown'st my glittering hearth
      With guiltlesse mirth,
  And giv'st me wassaile bowles to drink,
      Spiced to the brink.
  Lord, 'tis thy plenty-dropping hand
      That soiles my land,
  And gives me for my bushel sowne,
      Twice ten for one.
  Thou mak'st my teeming hen to lay
      Her egg each day,
  Besides my healthful ewes to bear
      Me twins each yeare;
  The while the conduits of my kine
      Run creame for wine.
  All these and better thou dost send
      Me to this end,
  That I should render, for my part,
      _A thankfulle heart,_
  Which, fired with incense, I resigne
      As wholly thine;
  But the acceptance, that must be,
      MY CHRIST, by thee.

ROBERT HERRICK.


       *       *       *       *       *

PEACE.


  Sweet Peace, where dost thou dwell? I humbly crave.
       Let me once know.
    I sought thee in a secret cave;
       And asked if Peace were there.
  A hollow wind did seem to answer, "No!
       Go, seek elsewhere."

  I did; and, going, did a rainbow note:
       "Surely," thought I,
    "This is the lace of Peace's coat.
       I will search out the matter."
  But, while I looked, the clouds immediately
       Did break and scatter.

  Then went I to a garden, and did spy
       A gallant flower,--
  The crown-imperial. "Sure," said I,
       "Peace at the root must dwell."
  But, when I digged, I saw a worm devour
       What showed so well.

  At length I met a reverend, good old man;
       Whom when for Peace
    I did demand, he thus began:
       "There was a prince of old
  At Salem dwelt, who lived with good increase
       Of flock and fold.

  "He sweetly lived; yet sweetness did not save
       His life from foes.
    But, after death, out of his grave
       There sprang twelve stalks of wheat;
  Which many wondering at, got some of those
       To plant and set.

  "It prospered strangely, and did soon disperse
       Through all the earth.
    For they that taste it do rehearse,
       That virtue lies therein,--
  A secret virtue, bringing peace and mirth,
       By flight of sin.

  "Take of this grain, which in my garden grows,
       And grows for you:
    Make bread of it; and that repose
       And peace which everywhere
  With so much earnestness you do pursue,
       Is only there."

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

PEACE.


    Is this the peace of God, this strange sweet calm?
  The weary day is at its zenith still,
    Yet 't is as if beside some cool, clear rill,
  Through shadowy stillness rose an evening psalm.
  And all the noise of life were hushed away,
  And tranquil gladness reigned with gently soothing sway.

    It was not so just now. I turned aside
  With aching head, and heart most sorely bowed;
  Around me cares and griefs in crushing crowd.
    While inly rose the sense, in swelling tide,
  Of weakness, insufficiency, and sin,
  And fear, and gloom, and doubt in mighty flood rolled in.

    That rushing flood I had no power to meet,
  Nor power to flee: my present, future, past,
  Myself, my sorrow, and my sin I cast
    In utter helplessness at Jesu's feet:
  Then bent me to the storm, if such his will.
  He saw the winds and waves, and whispered.
       "Peace, be still!"

    And there was calm! O Saviour, I have proved
  That thou to help and save art really near:
  How else this quiet rest from grief and fear
    And all distress? The cross is not removed,
  I must go forth to bear it as before,
  But, leaning on thine arm, I dread its weight no more.

    Is it indeed thy peace? I have not tried
  To analyze my faith, dissect my trust,
  Or measure if belief be full and just,
    And therefore claim thy peace. But thou hast died,
  I know that this is true for me,
  And, knowing it, I come, and cast my all on thee.

    It is not that I feel less weak, but thou
  Wilt be my strength; it is not that I see
  Less sin, but more of pardoning love with thee,
    And all-sufficient grace. Enough! and now
  All fluttering thought is stilled, I only rest,
  And feel that thou art near, and know that I am blest.

FRANCES RIDLEY HAVERGAL.


       *       *       *       *       *

LIVING WATERS.


  There are some hearts like wells, green-mossed and deep
        As ever Summer saw;
  And cool their water is,--yea, cool and sweet;--
        But you must come to draw.
  They hoard not, yet they rest in calm content,
        And not unsought will give;
  They can be quiet with their wealth unspent,
        So self-contained they live.

  And there are some like springs, that bubbling burst
        To follow dusty ways,
  And run with offered cup to quench his thirst
        Where the tired traveller strays;
  That never ask the meadows if they want
        What is their joy to give;--
  Unasked, their lives to other life they grant,
        So self-bestowed they live!

  And One is like the ocean, deep and wide,
        Wherein all waters fall;
  That girdles the broad earth, and draws the tide,
        Feeding and bearing all;
  That broods the mists, that sends the clouds abroad,
        That takes, again to give;--
  Even the great and loving heart of God.
        Whereby all love doth live.

CAROLINE S. SPENCER.


       *       *       *       *       *

DEVOTION.


          The immortal gods
  Accept the meanest altars, that are raised
  By pure devotion; and sometimes prefer
  An ounce of frankincense, honey, or milk,
  Before whole hecatombs, or Sabæan gems,
  Offered in ostentation.

PHILIP MASSINGER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SEASIDE WELL.

    "Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut
    off."--LAMENTATIONS iii. 54.


  One day I wandered where the salt sea-tide
       Backward had drawn its wave,
  And found a spring as sweet as e'er hillside
       To wild-flowers gave.
  Freshly it sparkled in the sun's bright look,
       And mid its pebbles strayed,
  As if it thought to join a happy brook
       In some green glade.

  But soon the heavy sea's resistless swell
       Came rolling in once more,
  Spreading its bitter o'er the clear sweet well
       And pebbled shore.
  Like a fair star thick buried in a cloud,
       Or life in the grave's gloom,
  The well, enwrapped in a deep watery shroud,
       Sunk to its tomb.

  As one who by the beach roams far and wide,
       Remnant of wreck to save,
  Again I wandered when the salt sea-tide
       Withdrew its wave;
  And there, unchanged, no taint in all its sweet,
       No anger in its tone,
  Still as it thought some happy brook to meet,
       The spring flowed on.

  While waves of bitterness rolled o'er its head,
       Its heart had folded deep
  Within itself, and quiet fancies led,
       As in a sleep;
  Till, when the ocean loosed his heavy chain,
       And gave it back to day,
  Calmly it turned to its own life again
       And gentle way.

  Happy, I thought, that which can draw its life
       Deep from the nether springs,
  Safe 'neath the pressure, tranquil mid the strife,
       Of surface things.
  Safe--for the sources of the nether springs
       Up in the far hills lie;
  Calm--for the life its power and freshness brings
       Down from the sky.

  So, should temptations threaten, and should sin
       Roll in its whelming flood,
  Make strong the fountain of thy grace within
       My soul, O God!
  If bitter scorn, and looks, once kind, grown strange,
       With crushing chillness fall,
  From secret wells let sweetness rise, nor change
       My heart to gall!

  When sore thy hand doth press, and waves of thine
       Afflict me like a sea,--
  Deep calling deep,--infuse from source divine
       Thy peace in me!
  And when death's tide, as with a brimful cup,
       Over my soul doth pour,
  Let hope survive,--a well that springeth up
       Forevermore!

  Above my head the waves may come and go,
       Long brood the deluge dire,
  But life lies hidden in the depths below
       Till waves retire,--
  Till death, that reigns with overflowing flood,
       At length withdraw its sway,
  And life rise sparkling in the sight of God
       An endless day.

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

ULTIMA VERITAS.


  In the bitter waves of woe,
    Beaten and tossed about
  By the sullen winds that blow
    From the desolate shores of doubt,--

  When the anchors that faith had cast
    Are dragging in the gale,
  I am quietly holding fast
    To the things that cannot fail:

  I know that right is right;
    That it is not good to lie;
  That love is better than spite,
    And a neighbor than a spy;

  I know that passion needs
    The leash of a sober mind;
  I know that generous deeds
    Some sure reward will find;

  That the rulers must obey;
    That the givers shall increase;
  That Duty lights the way
    For the beautiful feet of Peace;--

  In the darkest night of the year,
    When the stars have all gone out,
  That courage is better than fear,
    That faith is truer than doubt;

  And fierce though the fiends may fight,
    And long though the angels hide,
  I know that Truth and Eight
    Have the universe on their side;

  And that somewhere, beyond the stars,
    Is a Love that is better than fate;
  When the night unlocks her bars
    I shall see Him, and I will wait.

WASHINGTON GLADDEN.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE END OF THE PLAY.


  The play is done,--the curtain drops,
    Slow falling to the prompter's bell;
  A moment yet the actor stops,
    And looks around, to say farewell.
  It is an irksome word and task;
    And, when he's laughed and said his say,
  He shows, as he removes the mask,
    A face that's anything but gay.

  One word, ere yet the evening ends,--
    Let's close it with a parting rhyme;
  And pledge a hand to all young friends,
    As flits the merry Christmas time;
  On life's wide scene you, too, have parts
    That fate erelong shall bid you play;
  Good night!--with honest, gentle hearts
    A kindly greeting go alway!

  Good night!--I'd say the griefs, the joys,
    Just hinted in this mimic page,
  The triumphs and defeats of boys,
    Are but repeated in our age;
  I'd say your woes were not less-keen,
    Your hopes more vain, than those of men,--
  Your pangs or pleasures of fifteen
    At forty-five played o'er again.

  I'd say we suffer and we strive
    Not less nor more as men than boys,--
  With grizzled beards at forty-five,
    As erst at twelve in corduroys;
  And if, in time of sacred youth,
    We learned at home to love and pray,
  Pray Heaven that early love and truth
    May never wholly pass away.

  And in the world, as in the school,
    I'd say how fate may change and shift,--
  The prize be sometimes with the fool,
    The race not always to the swift:
  The strong may yield, the good may fall,
    The great man be a vulgar clown,
  The knave be lifted over all,
    The kind cast pitilessly down.

  Who knows the inscrutable design?
    Blessed be Be who took and gave!
  Why should your mother, Charles, not mine,
    Be weeping at her darling's grave?
  We bow to Heaven that willed it so,
    That darkly rules the fate of all,
  That sends the respite or the blow,
    That's free to give or to recall.

  This crowns his feast with wine and wit,--
    Who brought him to that mirth and state?
  His betters, see, below him sit,
    Or hunger hopeless at the gate.
  Who bade the mud from Dives' wheel
    To spurn the rags of Lazarus?
  Come, brother, in that dust we'll kneel,
    Confessing Heaven that ruled it thus.

  So each shall mourn, in life's advance,
    Dear hopes, dear friends, untimely killed;
  Shall grieve for many a forfeit chance
    And longing passion unfulfilled.
  Amen!--whatever fate be sent,
    Pray God the heart may kindly glow,
  Although the head with cares be bent,
    And whitened with the winter snow.

  Come wealth or want, come good or ill,
    Let young and old accept their part,
  And bow before the awful will,
    And bear it with an honest heart.
  Who misses, or who wins the prize,--
    Go, lose or conquer as you can;
  But if you fail, or if you rise,
    Be each, pray God, a gentleman.

  A gentleman, or old or young!
    (Bear kindly with my humble lays;)
  The sacred chorus first was sung
    Upon the first of Christmas days;
  The shepherds heard it overhead,--
    The joyful angels raised it then:
  Glory to Heaven on high, it said,
    And peace on earth to gentle men!

  My song, save this, is little worth;
    I lay the weary pen aside,
  And wish you health and love and mirth,
    As fits the solemn Christmas-tide.
  As fits the holy Christmas birth,
    Be this, good friends, our carol still,--
  Be peace on earth, be peace on earth,
    To men of gentle will.

WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW YEAR.

    FROM "IN MEMORIAM," CV.


  Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
    The flying cloud, the frosty light:
    The year is dying in the night--
  Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.

  Ring out the old, ring in the new--,
    Ring happy bells, across the snow:
    The year is going, let him go;
  Ring out the false, ring in the true.

  Ring out the grief that saps the mind,
    For those that here we see no more;
    Ring out the feud of rich and poor,
  Ring in redress to all mankind.

  Ring out a slowly dying cause,
    And ancient forms of party strife;
    Ring in the nobler modes of life,
  With sweeter manners, purer laws.

  Ring out the want, the care, the sin,
    The faithless coldness of the times;
    Ring out, ring out my mournful rhymes,
  But ring the fuller minstrel in.

  Ring out false pride in place and blood,
    The civic slander and the spite;
    Ring in the love of truth and right,
  Ring in the common love of good.

  Ring out old shapes of foul disease,
    Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
    Ring out the thousand wars of old,
  Ring in the thousand years of peace.

  Ring in the valiant man and free,
    The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
     Ring out the darkness of the land--
  Ring in the Christ that is to be.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON


       *       *       *       *       *

LIFE.


  It is not life upon thy gifts to live,
  But to grow fixed with deeper roots in Thee;
  And when the sun and showers their bounties give,
  To send out thick-leaved limbs; a fruitful tree
  Whose green head meets the eye for many a mile,
  Whose spreading boughs a friendly shelter rear,
  And full-faced fruits their blushing welcome smile
  As to its goodly shade our feet draw near.
  Who tastes its gifts shall never hunger more,
  For 't is the Father spreads the pure repast,
  Who, while we eat, renews the ready store,
  Which at his bounteous board must ever last;
  And, as the more we to his children lend,
  The more to us doth of his bounty send.

JONES VERY.


       *       *       *       *       *

SELECTIONS FROM PARADISE LOST.


  BOOK I.

  THE POET'S THEME.

  Of man's first disobedience and the fruit
  Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
  Brought death into the world and all our woe,
  With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
  Restore us and regain the blissful seat,
  Sing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
  Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
  That shepherd, who first taught the chosen seed,
  In the beginning how the heavens and earth
  Rose out of Chaos; or if Sion hill
  Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook that flowed
  Fast by the oracle of God; I thence
  Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song.
  That with no middle flight intends to soar
  Above the Aonian mount, while it pursues
  Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.

    And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer
  Before all temples the upright heart and pure,
  Instruct me, for thou know'st; thou from the first
  Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread
  Dove-like sat'st brooding on the vast abyss,
  And mad'st it pregnant: what in me is dark
  Illumine, what is low raise and support;
  That to the height of this great argument
  I may assert eternal Providence,
  And justify the ways of God to men.


  BOOK IX.

  THE TEMPTATION.

    The Sun was sunk, and after him the star
  Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring
  Twilight upon the Earth, short arbiter
  'Twixt day and night, and now from end to end
  Night's hemisphere had veiled the horizon round:
  When Satan, who late fled before the threats
  Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improved
  In meditated fraud and malice, bent
  On Man's destruction, maugre what might hap
  Of heavier on himself, fearless returned.
  By night he fled, and at midnight returned
  From compassing the Earth;

       *       *       *       *       *

                          The orb he roamed
  With narrow search; and with inspection deep
  Considered every creature, which of all
  Most opportune might serve his wiles; and found
  The serpent subtlest beast of all the field.
  Him, after long debate, irresolute
  Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
  Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom
  To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
  From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake
  Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark,
  As from his wit and native subtlety
  Proceeding; which, in other beasts observed.
  Doubt might beget of diabolic power
  Active within, beyond the sense of brute.

       *       *       *       *       *

  For now, and since first break of dawn, the fiend.
  Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come;
  And on his quest, where likeliest he might find
  The only two of mankind, but in them
  The whole included race, his purposed prey.
  In bower and field he sought where any tuft
  Of grove or garden-plot more pleasant lay,
  Their tendance, or plantation for delight;
  By fountain or by shady rivulet
  He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
  Eve separate; he wished, but not with hope
  Of what so seldom chanced; when to his wish,
  Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
  Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood,
  Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round
  About her glowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

  "She fair, divinely fair, fit love for gods.
  Not terrible, though terror be in love
  And beauty, not approached by stronger hate.
  Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned;
  The way which to her ruin now I tend."
    So spake the enemy of mankind, inclosed
  In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve
  Addressed his way: not with indented wave,
  Prone on the ground, as since; but on his rear,
  Circular base of rising folds, that towered
  Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head
  Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes;
  With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect.
  Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass
  Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape
  And lovely; never since of serpent-kind
  Lovelier.

       *       *       *       *       *

  So varied he, and of his tortuous train
  Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
  To lure her eye; she, busied, heard the sound
  Of rustling leaves, but minded not, as used
  To such disport before her through the field,
  From every beast; more duteous at her call,
  Than at Circean call the herd disguised.
  He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood,
  But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed
  His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck,
  Fawning; and licked the ground whereon she trod.
  His gentle dumb expression turned at length
  The eye of Eve, to mark his play; he, glad
  Of her attention gained, with serpent-tongue
  Organic, or impulse of vocal air,
  His fraudulent temptation thus began.
    "Wonder not, sovran mistress, if perhaps
  Thou canst who art sole wonder! much less arm
  Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
  Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
  Insatiate; I thus single; nor have feared
  Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired.
  Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
  Thee all things living gaze on all things thine
  By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore
  With ravishment beheld! there beat beheld,
  Where universally admired; but here
  In this inclosure wild, these beasts among,
  Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
  Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
  Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who should be seen
  A goddess among gods, adored and served
  By angels numberless, thy daily train."
     So glozed the tempter, and his proem tuned:
  Into the heart of Eve his words made way.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [_After some discourse, the Tempter praises the Tree of Knowledge._]

  So standing, moving, or to height up grown,
  The tempter, all impassioned, thus began.
     "O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving plant,
  Mother of science! now I feel thy power
  Within me clear; not only to discern
  Things in their causes, but to trace the ways
  Of highest agents, deemed however wise.
  Queen of this universe! do not believe
  Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die:
  How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life
  To knowledge; by the threatener? look on me.
  Me, who have touched and tasted; yet both live,
  And life more perfect have attained than Fate
  Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot.
  Shall that be shut to man, which to the beast
  Is open? or will God incense his ire
  For such a petty trespass? and not praise
  Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
  Of death denounced, whatever thing death be,
  Deterred not from achieving what might lead
  To happier life, knowledge of good and evil;
  Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
  Be real, why not known, since easier shunned?
  God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
  Not just, not God: not feared then, nor obeyed:
  Your fear itself of death removes the fear.
  Why then was this forbid? Why, but to awe;
  Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant,
  His worshippers? He knows that in the day
  Ye eat thereof, your eyes, that seem so clear,
  Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then
  Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as gods,
  Knowing both good and evil, as they know.
  That ye shall be as gods, since I as Man,
  Internal Man, is but proportion meet;
  I, of brute, human; ye, of human, gods.
  So ye shall die, perhaps, by putting off
  Human, to put on gods; death to be wished,
  Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring.
  And what are gods, that man may not become
  As they, participating godlike food?
  The gods are first, and that advantage use
  On our belief, that all from them proceeds:
  I question it; for this fair Earth I see,
  Warmed by the Sun, producing every kind;
  Them, nothing: if they all things, who inclosed
  Knowledge of good and evil in this tree,
  That whoso eats thereof forthwith attains
  Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
  The offence, that man should thus attain to know?
  What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree
  Impart against his will, if all be his?
  Or is it envy? and can envy dwell
  In heavenly breasts?--These, these, and many more
  Causes import your need of this fair fruit.
  Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste."


  THE FALL.

  He ended, and his words replete with guile
  Into her heart too easy entrance won:
  Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold
  Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound
  Yet rung of persuasive words, impregned
  With reason, to her seeming, and with truth:
  Meanwhile the hour of noon drew on, and waked
  An eager appetite, raised by the smell
  So savory of that fruit, which with desire,
  Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
  Solicited her longing eye; yet first
  Pausing awhile, thus to herself she mused.
    "Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits,
  Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired,
  Whose taste, too long forborne, at first assay
  Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
  The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise:
  Thy praise he also who forbids thy use
  Conceals not from us, naming thee the Tree
  Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
  Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding
  Commends thee more, while it infers the good
  By thee communicated, and our want:
  For good unknown sure is not had, or had
  And yet unknown is as not had at all.
  In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
  Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
  Such prohibitions bind not. But if death
  Bind us with after-bands, what profits then
  Our inward freedom? In the day we eat
  Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die.
  How dies the serpent? he hath eaten and lives,
  And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
  Irrational till then. For us alone
  Was death invented? or to us denied
  This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
  For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first
  Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy
  The good befallen him, author unsuspect,
  Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
  What fear I then? rather what know to fear
  Under this ignorance of good and evil,
  Of God or death, of law or penalty?
  Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine,
  Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste,
  Of virtue to make wise: what hinders then
  To reach, and feed at once both body and mind?"
    So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
  Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat:
  Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat
  Sighing through all her works gave signs of woe,
  That all was lost. Back to the thicket slunk
  The guilty serpent, and well might, for Eve
  Intent now wholly on her taste nought else
  Regarded, such delight till then, as seemed,
  In fruit she never tasted, whether true
  Or fancied so, through expectation high
  Of knowledge: nor was Godhead from her thought.
  Greedily she ingorged without restraint,
  And knew not eating death.


  BOOK XI.

  INTERCESSION AND REDEMPTION.

  Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood
  Praying; for from the mercy-seat above
  Prevenient grace descending had removed
  The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
  Regenerate grow instead; that sighs now breathed
  Unutterable; which the spirit of prayer
  Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
  Than loudest oratory: yet their port
  Not of mean suitors; nor important less
  Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair
  In fables old, less ancient yet than these,
  Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore
  The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine
  Of Themis stood devout. To Heaven their prayers
  Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds
  Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
  Dimensionless through heavenly doors; then clad
  With incense, where the golden altar fumed,
  By their great Intercessor, came in sight
  Before the Father's throne: them the glad Son
  Presenting, thus to intercede began.
    "See, Father, what first-fruits on Earth are sprung
  From thy implanted grace in Man; these sighs
  And prayers, which in this golden censer, mixed
  With incense, I thy priest before thee bring;
  Fruits of more pleasing savor, from thy seed
  Sown with contrition in his heart, than those
  Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees
  Of Paradise could have produced ere fallen
  From innocence. Now, therefore, bend thine ear
  To supplication; hear his sighs, though mute;
  Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
  Interpret for him; me, his advocate
  And propitiation; all his works on me,
  Good, or not good, ingraft; my merit those
  Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay.
  Accept me; and, in me, from these receive
  The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live
  Before thee reconciled, at least his days
  Numbered though sad; till death his doom (which I
  To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,)
  To better life shall yield him: where with me
  All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss;
  Made one with me, as I with thee am one."
    To whom the Father, without cloud, serene.
  "All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
  Obtain; all thy request was my decree:
  But, longer in that Paradise to dwell,
  The law I gave to Nature him forbids:
  Those pure immortal elements, that know
  No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul,
  Eject him, tainted now; and purge him off,
  As a distemper, gross, to air as gross,
  And mortal food; as may dispose him best
  For dissolution wrought by sin, that first
  Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
  Corrupted. I, at first, with two fair gifts
  Created him endowed; with happiness,
  And immortality: that fondly lost.
  This other served but to eternize woe;
  Till I provided death: so death becomes
  His final remedy; and, after life,
  Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
  By faith and faithful works, to second life,
  Waked in the renovation of the just,
  Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed."


  EVE'S LAMENT.

    O unexpected stroke, worse than of death!
  Must I thus leave thee, Paradise? thus leave
  Thee, native soil! these happy walks and shades,
  Fit haunt of gods; where I had hope to spend,
  Quiet, though sad, the respite of that day
  That must be mortal to us both? O flowers,
  That never will in other climate grow,
  My early visitation, and my last
  At even, which I bred up with tender hand
  From the first opening bud, and gave ye names!
  Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank
  Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount?
  Thee, lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned
  With what to sight or smell was sweet, from thee
  How shall I part, and whither wander down
  Into a lower world, to this obscure
  And wild? how shall we breathe in other air
  Less pure, accustomed to immortal fruits?


  EVE TO ADAM.

    With sorrow and heart's distress
  Wearied, I fell asleep. But now lead on;
  In me is no delay; with thee to go,
  Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
  Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me
  Art all things under heaven, all places thou,
  Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
  This further consolation, yet secure,
  I carry hence; though all by me is lost,
  Such favor I unworthy am vouchsafed,
  By me the promised Seed shall all restore.


  BOOK XII.

  THE DEPARTURE FROM PARADISE.

  In either hand the hastening angel caught
  Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate
  Led them direct, and down the cliff as fast
  To the subjected plain; then disappeared.
  They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld
  Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
  Waved over by that naming brand; the gate
  With dreadful faces thronged and fiery arms.
  Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them soon;
  The world was all before them, where to choose
  Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.
  They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow,
  Through Eden took their solitary way.

MILTON.




V.

HUMAN EXPERIENCE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PSALM OF LIFE.


  Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
    Life is but an empty dream!
  For the soul is dead that slumbers,
    And things are not what they seem.

  Life is real! Life is earnest!
    And the grave is not its goal;
  Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
    Was not spoken of the soul.

  Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
    Is our destined end or way;
  But to act, that each to-morrow
    Find us farther than to-day.

  Art is long, and Time is fleeting,
    And our hearts, though stout and brave,
  Still, like muffled drums, are beating
    Funeral marches to the grave.

  In the world's broad field of battle,
    In the bivouac of Life,
  Be not like dumb, driven cattle!
    Be a hero in the strife!

  Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant!
    Let the dead Past bury its dead!
  Act,--act in the living Present!
    Heart within, and God o'erhead!

  Lives of great men all remind us
    We can make our lives sublime.
  And, departing, leave behind us
    Footprints on the sands of time;--

  Footprints, that perhaps another,
    Sailing o'er life's solemn main,
  A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
    Seeing, shall take heart again.

  Let us, then, be up and doing,
    With a heart for any fate;
  Still achieving, still pursuing,
    Learn to labor and to wait.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE GIFTS OF GOD.


      When God at first made man,
  Having a glass of blessings standing by,
  Let us (said he) pour on him all we can:
  Let the world's riches, which dispersed lie,
      Contract into a span.

      So strength first made a way;
  Then beauty flowed, then wisdom, honor, pleasure:
  When almost all was out, God made a stay,
  Perceiving that, alone, of all his treasure,
      Rest in the bottom lay.

      For if I should (said he)
  Bestow this jewel also on my creature,
  He would adore my gifts instead of me,
  And rest in Nature, not the God of Nature:
      So both should losers be.

      Yet let him keep the rest,
  But keep them with repining restlessness:
  Let him be rich and weary, that, at least,
  If goodness lead him not, yet weariness
      May toss him to my breast.

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

DUTY.


  I slept and dreamed that life was Beauty:
  I woke and found that life was Duty:
  Was then thy dream a shadowy lie?
  Toil on, sad heart, courageously,
  And thou shalt find thy dream to be
  A noonday light and truth to thee.

ELLEN STURGIS HOOPER.


       *       *       *       *       *

ODE TO DUTY.


    Stern daughter of the voice of God!
      O Duty! if that name thou love
    Who art a light to guide, a rod
      To check the erring, and reprove--
    Thou, who art victory and law
    When empty terrors overawe;
    From vain temptations dost set free,
  And calm'st the weary strife of frail humanity!

    There are who ask not if thine eye
      Be on them; who, in love and truth
    Where no misgiving is, rely
      Upon the genial sense of youth:
    Glad hearts! without reproach or blot,
    Who do thy work, and know it not;
    Long may the kindly impulse last!
  But thou, if they should totter, teach them to stand fast!

    Serene will be our days and bright,
      And happy will our nature be,
    When love is an unerring light.
      And joy its own security.
    And they a blissful course may hold
    Even now, who, not unwisely bold.
    Live in the spirit of this creed;
  Yet find that other strength, according to their need.

    I, loving freedom, and untried,
      No sport of every random gust,
    Yet being to myself a guide,
      Too blindly have reposed my trust;
    And oft, when in my heart was heard
    Thy timely mandate, I deferred
    The task, in smoother walks to stray;
  But thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may.

    Through no disturbance of my soul,
      Or strong compunction in me wrought,
    I supplicate for thy control,
      But in the quietness of thought;
    Me this unchartered freedom tires;
    I feel the weight of chance desires,
    My hopes no more must change their name,
  I long for a repose that ever is the same.

    Stern lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
      The Godhead's most benignant grace;
    Nor know we any thing so fair
      As is the smile upon thy face;
    Flowers laugh before thee on their beds,
    And fragrance in thy footing treads;
    Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong;
  And the most ancient heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong.

    To humbler functions, awful power!
      I call thee: I myself commend
    Unto thy guidance from this hour;
      Oh, let my weakness have an end!
    Give unto me, made lowly wise,
    The spirit of self-sacrifice;
    The confidence of reason give;
  And in the light of truth thy bondman let me live!

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.


       *       *       *       *       *

SELF-INQUIRY.


  Let not soft slumber close my eyes,
  Before I've recollected thrice
  The train of action through the day!
  Where have my feet chose out their way?
  What have I learnt, where'er I've been,
  From all I have heard, from all I've seen?
  What know I more that's worth the knowing?
  What have I done that's worth the doing?
  What have I sought that I should shun?
  What duty have I left undone?
  Or into what new follies run?
    These self-inquiries are the road
    That leads to virtue and to God.

ISAAC WATTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE THREE ENEMIES.


  THE FLESH.

  "Sweet, thou art pale."
                  "More pale to see,
  Christ hung upon the cruel tree
  And bore his Father's wrath for me."

  "Sweet, thou art sad."
                  "Beneath a rod
  More heavy Christ for my sake trod
  The wine-press of the wrath of God."

  "Sweet, thou art weary."
                  "Not so Christ:
  Whose mighty love of me sufficed
  For strength, salvation, eucharist."

  "Sweet, thou art footsore."
                  "If I bleed,
  His feet have bled: yea, in my need
  His heart once bled for mine indeed."


  THE WORLD.

  "Sweet, thou art young."
                  "So he was young
  Who for my sake in silence hung
  Upon the cross with passion wrung."

  "Look, thou art fair."
                  "He was more fair
  Than men, who deigned for me to wear
  A visage marred beyond compare."

  "And thou hast riches."
                  "Daily bread:
  All else is his; who living, dead,
  For me lacked where to lay his head."

  "And life is sweet."
                  "It was not so
  To him, whose cup did overflow
  With mine unutterable woe."


  THE DEVIL.

  "Thou drinkest deep."
                  "When Christ would sup
  He drained the dregs from out my cup;
  So how should I be lifted up?"

  "Thou shalt win glory."
                  "In the skies,
  Lord Jesus, cover up mine eyes.
  Lest they should look on vanities."

  "Thou shalt have knowledge."
                  "Helpless dust,
  In thee, O Lord, I put my trust:
  Answer thou for me, Wise and Just."

CHRISTINA GEORGINA ROSSETTI.


       *       *       *       *       *

SAID I NOT SO?


  Said I not so,--that I would sin no more?
    Witness, my God, I did;
  Yet I am run again upon the score:
    My faults cannot be hid.

  What shall I do?--make vows and break them still?
    'Twill be but labor lost;
  My good cannot prevail against mine ill:
    The business will be crost.

  O, say not so; thou canst not tell what strength
    Thy God may give thee at the length.
  Renew thy vows, and if thou keep the last,
    Thy God will pardon all that's past.
  Vow while thou canst; while thou canst vow, thou may'st
    Perhaps perform it when thou thinkest least.

    Thy God hath not denied thee all,
    Whilst he permits thee but to call.
    Call to thy God for grace to keep
    Thy vows; and if thou break them, weep.
  Weep for thy broken vows, and vow again:
  Vows made with tears cannot be still in vain.
        Then once again
      I vow to mend my ways;
        Lord, say Amen,
      And thine be all the praise.

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

NOTHING BUT LEAVES.


  Nothing but leaves; the spirit grieves
    Over a wasted life;
  Sin committed while conscience slept,
  Promises made, but never kept,
    Hatred, battle, and strife;
      _Nothing but leaves_!

  Nothing but leaves; no garnered sheaves
    Of life's fair, ripened grain;
  Words, idle words, for earnest deeds;
  We sow our seeds,--lo! tares and weeds:
    We reap, with toil and pain,
      _Nothing but leaves_!

  Nothing but leaves; memory weaves
    No veil to screen the past:
  As we retrace our weary way,
  Counting each lost and misspent day,
    We find, sadly, at last,
      _Nothing but leaves_!

  And shall we meet the Master so,
    Bearing our withered leaves?
  The Saviour looks for perfect fruit,
  We stand before him, humbled, mute;
  Waiting the words he breathes,--
      "_Nothing but leaves_?"

LUCY E. AKERMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WORLD.

    "And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
    righteousness, and of judgment."--JOHN xvi. 8.


  The world is wise, for the world is old;
  Five thousand years their tale have told;
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be,--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  The world is kind if we ask not too much;
  It is sweet to the taste, and smooth to the touch;
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be,--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  The world is strong, with an awful strength,
  And full of life in its breadth and length;
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be,--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  The world is so beautiful one may fear
  Its borrowed beauty might make it too dear,
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  The world is good in its own poor way,
  There is rest by night and high spirits by day;
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be,--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  The cross shines fair, and the church-bell rings,
  And the earth is peopled with holy things;
  Yet the world is not happy, as the world might be,--
  Why is it? why is it? Oh, answer me!

  What lackest thou, world? for God made thee of old;
  Why,--thy faith hath gone out, and thy love grown cold;
  Thou art not happy, as thou mightest be,
  For the want of Christ's simplicity.

  It is blood that thou lackest, thou poor old world!
  Who shall make thy love hot for thee, frozen old world?
  Thou art not happy, as thou mightest be,
  For the love of dear Jesus is little in thee.

  Poor world! if thou cravest a better day,
  Remember that Christ must have his own way;
  I mourn thou art not as thou mightest be,
  But the love of God would do all for thee.

FREDERICK WILLIAM FABER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE CRY OF THE HUMAN.


  "There is no God," the foolish saith,
    But none, "There is no sorrow";
  And nature oft the cry of faith
    In bitter need will borrow:
  Eyes which the preacher could not school,
    By wayside graves are raised;
  And lips say, "God be pitiful,"
    Who ne'er said, "God be praised."
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The tempest stretches from the steep
    The shadow of its coming;
  The beasts grow tame, and near us creep,
    As help were in the human:
  Yet while the cloud-wheels roll and grind
    We spirits tremble under!--
  The hills have echoes; but we find
    No answer for the thunder.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The battle hurtles on the plains--
    Earth feels new scythes upon her:
  We reap our brothers for the wains,
    And call the harvest, honor,--
  Draw face to face, front line to line,
    One image all inherit,--
  Then kill, curse on, by that same sign,
    Clay, clay,--and spirit, spirit.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The plague runs festering through the town,
    And never a bell is tolling:
  And corpses jostled 'neath the moon,
    Nod to the dead-cart's rolling.
  The young child calleth for the cup--
    The strong man brings it weeping;
  The mother from her babe looks up,
    And shrieks away its sleeping.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The plague of gold strides far and near,
    And deep and strong it enters:
  This purple chimar which we wear,
    Makes madder than the centaur's.
  Our thoughts grow blank, our words grow strange;
    We cheer the pale gold-diggers--
  Each soul is worth so much on 'Change,
    And marked, like sheep, with figures.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The curse of gold upon the land,
    The lack of bread enforces--
  The rail-cars snort from strand to strand,
    Like more of Death's White Horses:
  The rich preach "rights" and future days,
    And hear no angel scoffing:
  The poor die mute--with starving gaze
    On corn-ships in the offing.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  We meet together at the feast--
    To private mirth betake us--
  We stare down in the winecup lest
    Some vacant chair should shake us!
  We name delight, and pledge it round--
    "It shall be ours to-morrow!"
  God's seraphs, do your voices sound
    As sad in naming sorrow?
          Be pitiful, O God!

  We sit together, with the skies,
    The steadfast skies, above us:
  We look into each other's eyes,
    "And how long will you love us?"
  The eyes grow dim with prophecy,
    The voice is low and breathless--
  "Till death us part!"--O words, to be
    Our _best_ for love the deathless!
          Be pitiful, dear God!

  We tremble by the harmless bed
    Of one loved and departed--
  Our tears drop on the lids that said
    Last night, "Be stronger hearted!"
  O God,--to clasp those fingers close,
    And yet to feel so lonely!--
  To see a light upon such brows,
    Which is the daylight only!
          Be pitiful, O God!

  The happy children come to us,
    And look up in our faces:
  They ask us--Was it thus, and thus,
    When we were in their places?
  We cannot speak:--we see anew
    The hills we used to live in;
  And feel our mother's smile press through
    The kisses she is giving.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  We pray together at the kirk,
    For mercy, mercy, solely--
  Hands weary with the evil work,
    We lift them to the Holy!
  The corpse is calm below our knee--
    Its spirit bright before thee--
  Between them, worse than either, we--
    Without the rest of glory!
           Be pitiful, O God!

  We leave the communing of men,
    The murmur of the passions;
  And live alone, to live again
    With endless generations.
  Are we so brave?--The sea and sky
    In silence lift their mirrors;
  And, glassed therein, our spirits high
    Recoil from their own terrors.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  We sit on hills our childhood wist,
    Woods, hamlets, streams, beholding:
  The sun strikes through the farthest mist,
    The city's spire to golden.
  The city's golden spire it was,
    When hope and health were strong;
  But now it is the churchyard grass,
    We look upon the longest.
          Be pitiful, O God!

  And soon all vision waxeth dull--
    Men whisper, "He is dying":
  We cry no more, "Be pitiful!"--
    We have no strength for crying:
  No strength, no need! Then, Soul of mine,
    Look up and triumph rather--
  Lo! in the depth of God's Divine,
    The Son adjures the Father--
          BE PITIFUL, O GOD.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SIFTING OF PETER.

    A FOLK-SONG.

    "Behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you
    as wheat."--LUKE xxii. 31.


  In Saint Luke's Gospel we are told
  How Peter in the days of old
      Was sifted;
  And now, though ages intervene,
  Sin is the same, while time and scene
      Are shifted.

  Satan desires us, great and small,
  As wheat, to sift us, and we all
      Are tempted;
  Not one, however rich or great,
  Is by his station or estate
      Exempted.

  No house so safely guarded is
  But he, by some device of his,
      Can enter;
  No heart hath armor so complete
  But he can pierce with arrows fleet
      Its centre.

  For all at last the cock will crow
  Who hear the warning voice, but go
      Unheeding,
  Till thrice and more they have denied
  The Man of Sorrows, crucified
      And bleeding.

  One look of that pale suffering face
  Will make us feel the deep disgrace
      Of weakness;
  We shall be sifted till the strength
  Of self-conceit be changed at length
      To meekness.

  Wounds of the soul, though healed, will ache;
  The reddening scars remain, and make
      Confession;
  Lost innocence returns no more;
  We are not what we were before
      Transgression.

  But noble souls, through dust and heat,
  Rise from disaster and defeat
      The stronger.
  And conscious still of the divine
  Within them, lie on earth supine
      No longer.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



       *       *       *       *       *

VANITY.


  The sun comes up and the sun goes down,
  And day and night are the same as one;
  The year grows green, and the year grows brown.
  And what is it all, when all is done?
  Grains of sombre or shining sand,
  Gliding into and out of the hand.

  And men go down in ships to the seas,
  And a hundred ships are the same as one;
  And backward and forward blows the breeze,
  And what is it all, when all is done?
  A tide with never a shore in sight
  Getting steadily on to the night.

  The fisher droppeth his net in the stream,
  And a hundred streams are the same as one;
  And the maiden dreameth her love-lit dream,
  And what is it all, when all is done?
  The net of the fisher the burden breaks,
  And alway the dreaming the dreamer wakes.

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

DIFFERENT MINDS.


  Some murmur when their sky is clear
    And wholly bright to view,
  If one small speck of dark appear
    In their great heaven of blue;
  And some with thankful love are filled
    If but one streak of light,
  One ray of God's good mercy, gild
    The darkness of their night.

  In palaces are hearts that ask,
    In discontent and pride,
  Why life is such a dreary task,
    And all good things denied;
  And hearts in poorest huts admire
    How Love has in their aid
  (Love that not ever seems to tire)
    Such rich provision made.

RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY RECOVERY.


  Recovery,--daughter of Creation too,
  Though not for immortality designed,--
      The Lord of life and death
      Sent thee from heaven to me!
  Had I not heard thy gentle tread approach,
  Not heard the whisper of thy welcome voice,
      Death had with iron foot
      My chilly forehead pressed.
  'Tis true, I then had wandered where the earths
  Roll around suns; had strayed along the paths
      Where the maned comet soars
      Beyond the armèd eye;
  And with the rapturous, eager greet had hailed
  The inmates of those earths and of those suns;
      Had hailed the countless host
      That throng the comet's disc;
  Had asked the novice questions, and obtained
  Such answers as a sage vouchsafes to youth;
      Had learned in hours far more
      Than ages here unfold!
  But I had then not ended here below
  What, in the enterprising bloom of life,
      Fate with no light behest
      Required me to begin.
  Recovery,--daughter of Creation too,
  Though not for immortality designed,--
      The Lord of life and death
      Sent thee from heaven to me!

From the German of FRIEDRICH GOTTLIEB KLOPSTOCK.

Translation of W. TAYLOR.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LADDER OF SAINT AUGUSTINE.


  Saint Augustine! well hast thou said,
    That of our vices we can frame
  A ladder, if we will but tread
    Beneath our feet each deed of shame!

  All common things, each day's events,
    That with the hour begin and end,
  Our pleasures and our discontents,
    Are rounds by which we may ascend.

  The low desire, the base design,
    That makes another's virtues less;
  The revel of the ruddy wine,
    And all occasions of excess;

  The longing for ignoble things;
    The strife for triumph more than truth;
  The hardening of the heart, that brings
    Irreverence for the dreams of youth;

  All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
    That have their root in thoughts of ill;
  Whatever hinders or impedes
    The action of the nobler will:--

  All these must first be trampled down
    Beneath our feet, if we would gain
  In the bright fields of fair renown
    The right of eminent domain.

  We have not wings, we cannot soar;
    But we have feet to scale and climb
  By slow degrees, by more and more,
    The cloudy summits of our time.

  The mighty pyramids of stone
    That wedge-like cleave the desert airs,
  When nearer seen, and better known,
    Are but gigantic flights of stairs.

  The distant mountains, that uprear
    Their solid bastions to the skies,
  Are crossed by pathways, that appear
    As we to higher levels rise.

  The heights by great men reached and kept
    Were not attained by sudden flight,
  But they, while their companions slept,
    Were toiling upward in the night.

  Standing on what too long we bore
    With shoulders bent and downcast eyes,
  We may discern--unseen before--
    A path to higher destinies.

  Nor deem the irrevocable Past
    As wholly wasted, wholly vain,
  If, rising on its wrecks, at last
    To something nobler we attain.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

SAINT CHRISTOPHER.


      "Carry me across!"
  The Syrian heard, rose up, and braced
  His huge limbs to the accustomed toil:
  "My child, see how the waters boil?
  The night-black heavens look angry-faced;
      But life is little loss.

      "I'll carry thee with joy,
  If needs be, safe as nestling dove:
  For o'er this stream I pilgrims bring
  In service to one Christ, a King
  Whom I have never seen, yet love."
      "I thank thee," said the boy.

      Cheerful, Arprobus took
  The burden on his shoulders great,
  And stepped into the waves once more;
  When lo! they leaping rise and roar,
  And 'neath the little child's light weight
      The tottering giant shook.

      "Who art thou?" cried he wild,
  Struggling in middle of the ford:
  "Boy as thou look'st, it seems to me
  The whole world's load I bear in thee,
  Yet--" "For the sake of Christ, thy Lord,
      Carry me," said the child.

      No more Arprobus swerved,
  But gained the farther bank, and then
  A voice cried, "Hence _Christopheros_ be!
  For carrying thou hast carried Me,
  The King of angels and of men,
      The Master thou hast served."

      And in the moonlight blue
  The saint saw,--not the wandering boy,
  But him who walked upon the sea
  And o'er the plains of Galilee,
  Till, filled with mystic, awful joy,
      His dear Lord Christ he knew.

      Oh, little is all loss,
  And brief the space 'twixt shore and shore,
  If thou, Lord Jesus, on us lay,
  Through the deep waters of our way,
  The burden that Christopheros bore,--
      To carry thee across.

DINAH MARIA MULOCK CRAIK.


       *       *       *       *       *

SCORN NOT THE LEAST.


  When words are weak and foes encountering strong,
  Where mightier do assault than do defend,
  The feebler part puts up enforced wrong,
  And silent sees that speech could not amend.
  Yet higher powers most think though they repine,--
  When sun is set, the little stars will shine.

  While pike doth range, the silly tench doth fly,
  And crouch in privy creeks with smaller fish;
  Yet pikes are caught when little fish go by;
  These fleet afloat while those do fill the dish.
  There is a time even for the worms to creep.
  And suck the dew while all their foes do sleep.

  The merlin cannot ever soar on high,
  Nor greedy greyhound still pursue the chase;
  The tender lark will find a time to fly.
  And fearful hare to run a quiet race.
  He that high-growth on cedars did bestow,
  Gave also lowly mushrooms leave to grow.

  In Haman's pomp poor Mardocheus wept,
  Yet God did turn his fate upon his foe;
  The Lazar pined while Dives' feast was kept,
  Yet he to heaven, to hell did Dives go.
  We trample grass, and prize the flowers of May,
  Yet grass is green when flowers do fade away.

ROBERT SOUTHWELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE RIGHT MUST WIN.


  O, it is hard to work for God,
    To rise and take his part
  Upon this battle-field of earth,
    And not sometimes lose heart!

  He hides himself so wondrously,
    As though there were no God;
  He is least seen when all the powers
    Of ill are most abroad.

  Or he deserts us at the hour
    The fight is all but lost;
  And seems to leave us to ourselves
    Just when we need him most.

  Ill masters good, good seems to change
    To ill with greater ease;
  And, worst of all, the good with good
    Is at cross-purposes.

  Ah! God is other than we think;
    His ways are far above,
  Far beyond reason's height, and reached
    Only by childlike love.

  Workman of God! O, lose not heart,
    But learn what God is like;
  And in the darkest battle-field
    Thou shalt know where to strike.

  Thrice blest is he to whom is given
    The instinct that can tell
  That God is on the field when he
    Is most invisible.

  Blest, is he who can divine
    Where the real right doth lie,
  And dares to take the side that seems
    Wrong to man's blindfold eye.

  For right is right, since God is God;
    And right the day must win;
  To doubt would be disloyalty,
    To falter would be sin!

FREDERICK WILLIAM FABER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE COST OF WORTH.

    FROM "BITTER SWEET."


  Thus is it all over the earth!
    That which we call the fairest.
  And prize for its surpassing worth,
          Is always rarest.

  Iron is heaped in mountain piles,
    And gluts the laggard forges;
  But gold-flakes gleam in dim defiles
          And lonely gorges.

  The snowy marble flecks the land
    With heaped and rounded ledges,
  But diamonds hide within the sand
          Their starry edges.

  The finny armies clog the twine
    That sweeps the lazy river,
  But pearls come singly from the brine
          With the pale diver.

  God gives no value unto men
    Unmatched by meed of labor;
  And Cost of Worth has ever been
          The closest neighbor.

       *       *       *       *       *

  All common good has common price;
    Exceeding good, exceeding;
  Christ bought the keys of Paradise
          By cruel bleeding;

  And every soul that wins a place
    Upon its hills of pleasure,
  Must give it all, and beg for grace
          To fill the measure.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Up the broad stairs that Value rears
    Stand motives beck'ning earthward,
  To summon men to nobler spheres,
          And lead them worthward.

JOSIAH GILBERT HOLLAND.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LABORER.


  Stand up--erect! Thou hast the form
    And likeness of thy God!--Who more?
  A soul as dauntless 'mid the storm
  Of daily life, a heart as warm
      And pure, as breast e'er wore.

  What then?--Thou art as true a man
    As moves the human mass among;
  As much a part of the great plan
  That with creation's dawn began,
      As any of the throng.

  Who is thine enemy? The high
    In station, or in wealth the chief?
  The great, who coldly pass thee by,
  With proud step and averted eye?
      Nay! nurse not such belief.

  If true unto thyself thou wast,
    What were the proud one's scorn to thee?
  A feather which thou mightest cast
  Aside, as idly as the blast
      The light leaf from the tree.

  No: uncurbed passions, low desires,
    Absence of noble self-respect.
  Death, in the breast's consuming fires,
  To that high nature which aspires
      Forever, till thus checked;--

  These are thine enemies--thy worst:
    They chain thee to thy lowly lot;
  Thy labor and thy life accursed.
  O, stand erect, and from them burst,
      And longer suffer not.

  Thou art thyself thine enemy:
    The great!--what better they than thou?
  As theirs is not thy will as free?
  Has God with equal favors thee
      Neglected to endow?

  True, wealth thou hast not--'tis but dust;
    Nor place--uncertain as the wind;
  But that thou hast, which, with thy crust
  And water, may despise the lust
      Of both--a noble mind.

  With this, and passions under ban,
    True faith, and holy trust in God,
  Thou art the peer of any man.
  Look up then; that thy little span
      Of life may be well trod.

WILLIAM D. GALLAGHER.


       *       *       *       *       *

A TRUE LENT.


  Is this a fast,--to keep
    The larder lean,
      And clean
  From fat of veals and sheep?

  Is it to quit the dish
    Of flesh, yet still
      To fill
  The platter high with fish?

  Is it to fast an hour.
    Or ragg'd to go,
      Or show
  A downcast look, and sour?

  No! 't is a fast to dole
    Thy sheaf of wheat,
      And meat,
  Unto the hungry soul.

  It is to fast from strife,
    From old debate
      And hate,--
  To circumcise thy life.

  To show a heart grief-rent;
    To starve thy sin,
      Not bin,--
  And that's to keep thy Lent.

ROBERT HERRICK.


       *       *       *       *       *

FROM "THE CHURCH PORCH."


  Thou whose sweet youth and early hopes enhance
  Thy rate and price, and mark thee for a treasure.
  Hearken unto a Verser, who may chance
  Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of pleasure:
    A verse may find him who a sermon flies
    And turn delight into a sacrifice.

  When thou dost purpose aught (within thy power),
  Be sure to doe it, though it be but small;
  Constancie knits the bones, and make us stowre,
  When wanton pleasures beckon us to thrall.
    Who breaks his own bond, forfeiteth himself:
    What nature made a ship, he makes a shelf.

       *       *       *       *       *

  By all means use sometimes to be alone.
  Salute thyself: see what thy soul doth wear.
  Dare to look in thy chest; for 't is thine own;
  And tumble up and down what thou find'st there.
    Who cannot rest till he good fellows finde,
    He breaks up house, turns out of doores his minde.

  In clothes, cheap handsomenesse doth bear the bell.
  Wisdome's a trimmer thing than shop e'er gave.
  Say not then, This with that lace will do well;
  But, This with my discretion will be brave.
    Much curiousnesse is a perpetual wooing;
    Nothing, with labor; folly, long a doing.

       *       *       *       *       *

  When once thy foot enters the church, be bare.
  God is more there than thou; for thou art there
  Only by his permission. Then beware,
  And make thyself all reverence and fear.
    Kneeling ne'er spoiled silk stockings; quit thy state;
    All equal are within the church's gate.

  Resort to sermons, but to prayers most:
  Praying's the end of preaching. O, be drest!
  Stay not for th' other pin: why thou hast lost
  A joy for it worth worlds. Thus hell doth jest
    Away thy blessings, and extremely flout thee,
    Thy clothes being fast, but thy soul loose about thee.

  Judge not the preacher; for he is thy judge:
  If thou mislike him, thou conceiv'st him not.
  God calleth preaching folly. Do not grudge
  To pick out treasures from an earthen pot.
    The worst speak something good: if _all_ want sense,
    God takes a text, and preacheth Pa-ti-ence.

GEORGE HERBERT.


       *       *       *       *       *

BRIEFS.


    WATER TURNED INTO WINE.

  The conscious water saw its God and blushed.


    THE WIDOW'S MITES.

  Two mites, two drops, yet all her house and land,
  Fall from a steady heart, though trembling hand:
  The other's wanton wealth foams high, and brave;
  The other cast away, she only gave.


    "TWO WENT UP TO THE TEMPLE TO PRAY."

  Two went to pray? O, rather say,
  One went to brag, the other to pray;

  One stands up close and treads on high,
  Where the other dares not lend his eye;

  One nearer to God's altar trod,
  The other to the altar's God.

RICHARD CRASHAW.


       *       *       *       *       *

JEWISH HYMN IN BABYLON.


  God of the thunder! from whose cloudy seat
    The fiery winds of Desolation flow;
  Father of vengeance, that with purple feet
    Like a full wine-press tread'st the world below;
  The embattled armies wait thy sign to slay,
  Nor springs the beast of havoc on his prey,
  Nor withering Famine walks his blasted way,
    Till thou hast marked the guilty land for woe.

  God of the rainbow! at whose gracious sign
    The billows of the proud their rage suppress;
  Father of mercies! at one word of thine
    An Eden blooms in the waste wilderness,
  And fountains sparkle in the arid sands,
  And timbrels ring in maidens' glancing hands,
  And marble cities crown the laughing lands,
    And pillared temples rise thy name to bless.

  O'er Judah's land thy thunders broke, O Lord!
    The chariots rattled o'er her sunken gate,
  Her sons were wasted by the Assyrian's sword,
    Even her foes wept to see her fallen state;
  And heaps her ivory palaces became,
  Her princes wore the captive's garb of shame,
  Her temples sank amid the smouldering flame,
    For thou didst ride the tempest cloud of fate.

  O'er Judah's land thy rainbow, Lord, shall beam,
    And the sad City lift her crownless head,
  And songs shall wake and dancing footsteps gleam
    In streets where broods the silence of the dead.
  The sun shall shine on Salem's gilded towers,
  On Carmel's side our maidens cull the flowers
  To deck at blushing eye their bridal bowers,
    And angel feet the glittering Sion tread.

  Thy vengeance gave us to the stranger's hand,
    And Abraham's children were led forth for slaves.
  With fettered steps we left our pleasant land,
    Envying our fathers in their peaceful graves.
  The strangers' bread with bitter tears we steep,
  And when our weary eyes should sink to sleep,
  In the mute midnight we steal forth to weep.
    Where the pale willows shade Euphrates' waves.

  The born in sorrow shall bring forth in joy;
    Thy mercy, Lord, shall lead thy children home;
  He that went forth a tender prattling boy
    Yet, ere he die, to Salem's streets shall come;
  And Canaan's vines for us their fruit shall bear,
  And Hermon's bees their honeyed stores prepare,
  And we shall kneel again in thankful prayer,
    Where o'er the cherub seated God full blazed the irradiate dome.

HENRY HART MILMAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

EXAMPLE.


  We scatter seeds with careless hand,
    And dream we ne'er shall see them more;
      But for a thousand years
      Their fruit appears,
  In weeds that mar the land,
    Or healthful store.

  The deeds we do, the words we say,--
    Into still air they seem to fleet,
      We count them ever past;
      But they shall last,--
  In the dread judgment they
    And we shall meet.

  I charge thee by the years gone by,
    For the love's sake of brethren dear,
      Keep thou the one true way,
      In work and play,
  Lest in that world their cry
    Of woe thou hear.

JOHN KEBLE.


       *       *       *       *       *

SMALL BEGINNINGS.


  A traveller through a dusty road strewed acorns on the lea;
  And one took root and sprouted up, and grew into a tree.
  Love sought its shade, at evening time, to breath its early vows;
  And age was pleased, in heats of noon, to bask beneath its boughs;
  The dormouse loved its dangling twigs, the birds sweet music bore;
  It stood a glory in its place, a blessing evermore.

  A little spring had lost its way amid the grass and fern,
  A passing stranger scooped a well, where weary men might turn;
  He walled it in, and hung with care a ladle at the brink;
  He thought not of the deed he did, but judged that toil might drink.
  He passed again, and lo! the well, by summers never dried,
  Had cooled ten thousand parching tongues, and saved a life besides.

  A dreamer dropped a random thought; 't was old, and yet 't was new;
  A simple fancy of the brain, but strong in being true.
  It shone upon a genial mind, and lo! its light became
  A lamp of life, a beacon ray, a monitory flame.
  The thought was small; its issue great; a watch-fire on the hill,
  It shed its radiance far adown, and cheers the valley still!

  A nameless man, amid the crowd that thronged the daily mart,
  Let fall a word of Hope and Love, unstudied, from the heart;
  A whisper on the tumult thrown,--a transitory breath,--
  It raised a brother from the dust; it saved a soul from death.
  O germ! O fount! O word of love! O thought at random cast!
  Ye were but little at the first, but mighty at the last.

CHARLES MACKAY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE RISE OF MAN.


  Thou for whose birth the whole creation yearned
  Through countless ages of the morning world,
  Who, first in fiery vapors dimly hurled,
  Next to the senseless crystal slowly turned,
  Then to the plant which grew to something more,--
  Humblest of creatures that draw breath of life,--
  Wherefrom through infinites of patient pain
  Came conscious man to reason and adore:
  Shall we be shamed because such things have been,
  Or bate one jot of our ancestral pride?
  Nay, in thyself art thou not deified
  That from such depths thou couldst such summits win?
  While the long way behind is prophecy
  Of those perfections which are yet to be.

JOHN WHITE CHADWICK.


       *       *       *       *       *

I WOULD I WERE AN EXCELLENT DIVINE.


  I would I were an excellent divine.
    That had the Bible at my fingers' ends;
  That men might hear out of this mouth of mine
    How God doth make his enemies his friends;
  Rather than with a thundering and long prayer
  Be led into presumption, or despair.

  This would I be, and would none other be,
    But a religious servant of my God;
  And know there is none other God but he.
    And willingly to suffer mercy's rod,--
  Joy in his grace, and live but in his love,
  And seek my bliss but in the world above.

  And I would frame a kind of faithful prayer,
    For all estates within the state of grace,
  That careful love might never know despair.
    Nor servile fear might faithful love deface;
  And this would I both day and night devise
  To make my humble spirit's exercise.

  And I would read the rules of sacred life;
    Persuade the troubled soul to patience;
  The husband care, and comfort to the wife,
    To child and servant due obedience;
  Faith to the friend, and to the neighbor peace,
  That love might live, and quarrels all might cease.

  Prayer for the health of all that are diseased,
    Confession unto all that are convicted,
  And patience unto all that are displeased,
    And comfort unto all that are afflicted,
  And mercy unto all that have offended,
  And grace to all, that all may be amended.

NICHOLAS BRETON.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE PASTOR'S REVERIE.


  The pastor sits in his easy-chair,
    With the Bible upon his knee.
  From gold to purple the clouds in the west
    Are changing momently;
  The shadows lie in the valleys below,
    And hide in the curtain's fold;
  And the page grows dim whereon he reads,
    "I remember the days of old."

  "Not clear nor dark," as the Scripture saith,
    The pastor's memories are;
  No day that is gone was shadowless,
    No night was without its star;
  But mingled bitter and sweet hath been
    The portion of his cup:
  "The hand that in love hath smitten," he saith,
    "In love hath bound us up."

  Fleet flies his thoughts over many a field
    Of stubble and snow and bloom,
  And now it trips through a festival,
    And now it halts at a tomb;
  Young faces smile in his reverie,
    Of those that are young no more,
  And voices are heard that only come
    With the winds from a far-off shore.

  He thinks of the day when first, with fear
    And faltering lips, he stood
  To speak in the sacred place the Word
    To the waiting multitude;
  He walks again to the house of God
    With the voice of joy and praise,
  With many whose feet long time have pressed
    Heaven's safe and blessèd ways.

  He enters again the homes of toil,
    And joins in the homely chat;
  He stands in the shop of the artisan;
    He sits, where the Master sat,
  At the poor man's fire and the rich man's feast.
    But who to-day are the poor,
  And who are the rich? Ask him who keeps
    The treasures that ever endure.

  Once more the green and the grove resound
    With the merry children's din;
  He hears their shout at the Christmas tide,
    When Santa Claus stalks in.
  Once more he lists while the camp-fire roars
    On the distant mountain-side,
  Or, proving apostleship, plies the brook
    Where the fierce young troutlings hide.

  And now he beholds the wedding train
    To the altar slowly move,
  And the solemn words are said that seal
    The sacrament of love.
  Anon at the font he meets once more
    The tremulous youthful pair,
  With a white-robed cherub crowing response
    To the consecrating prayer.

  By the couch of pain he kneels again;
    Again, the thin hand lies
  Cold in his palm, while the last far look
    Steals into the steadfast eyes;
  And now the burden of hearts that break
    Lies heavy upon his own--
  The widow's woe and the orphan's cry
    And the desolate mother's moan.

  So blithe and glad, so heavy and sad,
    Are the days that are no more,
  So mournfully sweet are the sounds that float
    With the winds from a far-off shore.
  For the pastor has learned what meaneth the word
    That is given him to keep,--
  "Rejoice with them that do rejoice,
    And weep with them that weep."

  It is not in vain that he has trod
    This lonely and toilsome way.
  It is not in vain that he has wrought
    In the vineyard all the day;
  For the soul that gives is the soul that lives,
    And bearing another's load
  Doth lighten your own and shorten the way,
    And brighten the homeward road.

WASHINGTON GLADDEN.


       *       *       *       *       *

TWO RABBIS.


  The Rabbi Nathan, twoscore years and ten,
  Walked blameless through the evil world, and then
  Just as the almond blossomed in his hair,
  Met a temptation all too strong to bear,
  And miserably sinned. So, adding not
  Falsehood to guilt, he left his seat, and taught
  No more among the elders, but went out
  From the great congregation girt about
  With sackcloth, and with ashes on his head,
  Making his gray locks grayer. Long he prayed,
  Smiting his breast; then, as the Book he laid
  Open before him for the Bath-Col's choice,
  Pausing to hear that Daughter of a Voice,
  Behold the royal preacher's words: "A friend
  Loveth at all times, yea, unto the end;
  And for the evil day thy brother lives."
  Marvelling, he said: "It is the Lord who gives
  Counsel in need. At Ecbatana dwells
  Rabbi Ben Isaac, who all men excels
  In righteousness and wisdom, as the trees
  Of Lebanon the small weeds that the bees
  Bow with their weight. I will arise and lay
  My sins before him."

      And he went his way
  Barefooted, fasting long, with many prayers;
  But even as one who, followed unawares,
  Suddenly in the darkness feels a hand
  Thrill with its touch his own, and his cheek fanned
  By odors subtly sweet, and whispers near
  Of words he loathes, yet cannot choose but hear,
  So, while the Rabbi journeyed, chanting low
  The wail of David's penitential woe,
  Before him still the old temptation came,
  And mocked him with the motion and the shame
  Of such desires that, shuddering, he abhorred
  Himself; and, crying mightily to the Lord
  To free his soul and cast the demon out,
  Smote with his staff the blackness round about.

  At length, in the low light of a spent day,
  The towers of Ecbatana far away
  Rose on the desert's rim; and Nathan, faint
  And footsore, pausing where for some dead saint
  The faith of Islam reared a domèd tomb,
  Saw some one kneeling in the shadow, whom
  He greeted kindly: "May the Holy One
  Answer thy prayers, O stranger!" Whereupon
  The shape stood up with a loud cry, and then,
  Clasped in each other's arms, the two gray men
  Wept, praising him whose gracious providence
  Made their paths one. But straightway, as the sense
  Of his transgression smote him, Nathan tore
  Himself away: "O friend beloved, no more
  Worthy am I to touch thee, for I came,
  Foul from my sins to tell thee all my shame.
  Haply thy prayers, since naught availeth mine,
  May purge my soul, and make it white like thine.
  Pity me, O Ben Isaac, I have sinned!"
  Awestruck Ben Isaac stood. The desert wind
  Blew his long mantle backward, laying bare
  The mournful secret of his shirt of hair.
  "I too, O friend, if not in act," he said,
  "In thought have verily sinned. Hast thou not read,
  'Better the eye should see than that desire
  Should wander'? Burning with a hidden fire
  That tears and prayers quench not, I come to thee
  For pity and for help, as thou to me.
  Pray for me, O my friend!" But Nathan cried,
  "Pray thou for me, Ben Isaac!"

      Side by side
  In the low sunshine by the turban stone
  They knelt; each made his brother's woe his own,
  Forgetting, in the agony and stress
  Of pitying love, his claim of selfishness;
  Peace, for his friend besought, his own became;
  His prayers were answered in another's name;
  And, when at last they rose up to embrace,
  Each saw God's pardon in his brother's face!

  Long after, when his headstone gathered moss,
  Traced on the targum-marge of Onkelos
  In Rabbi Nathan's hand these words were read:
  "Hope not the cure of sin till Self is dead;
  Forget it in love's service, and the debt
  Thou canst not pay the angels shall forget;
  Heaven's gate is shut to him who comes alone;
  Save thou a soul, and it shall save thy own!"

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.


       *       *       *       *       *

JUDGE NOT.


  Judge not; the workings of his brain
    And of his heart thou canst not see;
  What looks to thy dim eyes a stain,
    In God's pure light may only be
  A scar, brought from some well-won field,
  Where thou wouldst only faint and yield.

  The look, the air, that frets thy sight
    May be a token that below
  The soul has closed in deadly fight
    With some infernal fiery foe,
  Whose glance would scorch thy smiling grace
  And cast thee shuddering on thy face!

  The fall thou darest to despise,--
    May be the angel's slackened hand
  Has suffered it, that he may rise
    And take a firmer, surer stand;
  Or, trusting less to earthly things,
  May henceforth learn to use his wings.

  And judge none lost; but wait and see,
    With hopeful pity, not disdain;
  The depth of the abyss may be
    The measure of the height of pain
  And love and glory that may raise
  This soul to God in after days!

ADELAIDE ANNE PROCTER.


       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE UNCO GUID.


      "My son, these maxims make a rule
        And lump them aye thegither:
      The Rigid Righteous is a fool,
        The Rigid Wise anither:
      The cleanest corn that e'er was dight
        May hae some pyles o' caff in;
      Sae ne'er a fellow-creature slight
        For random fits o' daffin."

      --SOLOMON, _Ecclesiastes_ vii. 16.


  O ye wha are sae guid yoursel',
    Sae pious and sae holy,
  Ye've nought to do but mark and tell
    Your neebor's fauts and folly:--
  Whase life is like a weel-gaun mill,
    Supplied wi' store o' water.
  The heapèt happer's ebbing still,
    And still the clap plays clatter.

  Hear me, ye venerable core,
    As counsel for poor mortals,
  That frequent pass douce Wisdom's door,
    For glaikit Folly's portals!
  I, for their thoughtless, careless sakes,
    Would here propone defences,
  Their donsie tricks, their black mistakes,
    Their failings and mischances.

  Ye see your state wi' theirs compared,
    And shudder at the niffer;
  But cast a moment's fair regard,
    What makes the mighty differ?
  Discount what scant occasion gave
    That purity ye pride in,
  And (what's aft mair than a' the lave)
    Your better art o' hidin'.

  Think, when your castigated pulse
    Gies now and then a wallop,
  What ragings must his veins convulse,
    That still eternal gallop:
  Wi' wind and tide fair i' your tail,
    Right on ye scud your sea-way;
  But in the teeth o' baith to sail,
    It makes an unco leeway.

  See Social life and Glee sit down,
    All joyous and unthinking,
  Till, quite transmugrified, they're grown
    Debauchery and Drinking:
  O, would they stay to calculate
    The eternal consequences;
  Or your mortal dreaded hell to state,
    Damnation of expenses!

  Ye high, exalted, virtuous dames,
    Tied up in godly laces,
  Before ye gie poor Frailty names,
    Suppose a change o' cases;
  A dear-loved lad, convenience snug,
    A treacherous inclination,--
  But, let me whisper i' your lug,
    Ye 're aiblins nae temptation.

  Then gently scan your brother man,
    Still gentler sister woman;
  Though they may gang a kennin' wrang,
    To step aside is human.
  One point must still be greatly dark,
    The moving why they do it;
  And just as lamely can ye mark
    How far perhaps they rue it.

  Who made the heart, 't is He alone
    Decidedly can try us;
  He knows each chord,--its various tone,
    Each spring,--its various bias:
  Then at the balance let's be mute,
    We never can adjust it;
  What's done we partly may compute,
    But know not what's resisted.

ROBERT BURNS.


       *       *       *       *       *

STONE THE WOMAN, LET THE MAN GO FREE.


  Yes, stone the woman, let the man go free!
  Draw back your skirts, lest they perchance may touch
  Her garment as she passes; but to him
  Put forth a willing hand to clasp with his
  That led her to destruction and disgrace.
  Shut up from her the sacred ways of toil,
  That she no more may win an honest meal;
  But ope to him all honorable paths
  Where he may win distinction; give to him
  Fair, pressed-down measures of life's sweetest joys.
  Pass her, O maiden, with a pure, proud face,
  If she puts out a poor, polluted palm;
  But lay thy hand in his on bridal day,
  And swear to cling to him with wifely love
  And tender reverence. Trust him who led
  A sister woman to a fearful fate.

  Yes, stone the woman, let the man go free!
  Let one soul suffer for the guilt of two--
  It is the doctrine of a hurried world,
  Too out of breath for holding balances
  Where nice distinctions and injustices
  Are calmly weighed. But ah, how will it be
  On that strange day of fire and flame,
  When men shall wither with a mystic fear,
  And all shall stand before the one true Judge?
  Shall sex make _then_ a difference in sin?
  Shall He, the Searcher of the hidden heart,
  In His eternal and divine decree
  Condemn the woman and forgive the man?

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

IN PRISON.


  God pity the wretched prisoners,
    In their lonely cells to-day!
  Whatever the sins that tripped them,
    God pity them! still I say.

  Only a strip of sunshine,
    Cleft by rusty bars;
  Only a patch of azure,
    Only a cluster of stars;

  Only a barren future,
    To starve their hope upon;
  Only stinging memories
    Of a past that's better gone;

  Only scorn from women.
    Only hate from men,
  Only remorse to whisper
    Of a life that might have been.

  Once they were little children.
    And perhaps their unstained feet
  Were led by a gentle mother
    Toward the golden street;

  Therefore, if in life's forest
    They since have lost their way,
  For the sake of her who loved them,
    God pity them! still I say.

  O mothers gone to heaven!
    With earnest heart I ask
  That your eyes may not look earthward
    On the failure of your task.

  For even in those mansions
    The choking tears would rise,
  Though the fairest hand in heaven
    Would wipe them from your eyes!

  And you, who judge so harshly,
    Are you sure the stumbling-stone
  That tripped the feet of others
    Might not have bruised your own?

  Are you sure the sad-faced angel
    Who writes our errors down
  Will ascribe to you more honor
    Than him on whom you frown?

  Or, if a steadier purpose
    Unto your life is given;
  A stronger will to conquer,
    A smoother path to heaven;

  If, when temptations meet you,
    You crush them with a smile;
  If you can chain pale passion
    And keep your lips from guile;

  Then bless the hand that crowned you,
    Remembering, as you go,
  'T was not your own endeavor
    That shaped your nature so;

  And sneer not at the weakness
    Which made a brother fall,
  For the hand that lifts the fallen,
    God loves the best of all!

  And pray for the wretched prisoners
    All over the land to-day,
  That a holy hand in pity
    May wipe their guilt away.

MAY RILEY SMITH.


       *       *       *       *       *

CONSCIENCE AND REMORSE.


  "Good-bye," I said to my Conscience--
    "Good-bye for aye and aye;"
  And I put her hands off harshly,
    And turned my face away:
  And Conscience, smitten sorely,
    Returned not from that day.

  But a time came when my spirit
    Grew weary of its pace:
  And I cried, "Come back, my Conscience,
    I long to see thy face;"
  But Conscience cried, "I cannot,--
    Remorse sits in my place."

PAUL LAWRENCE DUNBAR.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOUND WANTING.


  Belshazzar had a letter,--
  He never had but one;
  Belshazzar's correspondent
  Concluded and begun
  In that immortal copy
  The conscience of us all
  Can read without its glasses
  On revelation's wall.

EMILY DICKINSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

DALLYING WITH TEMPTATION.

    FROM THE FIRST PART OF "WALLENSTEIN," ACT III. SC. 4.


  Wallenstein _(in soliloquy_). Is it possible?
  Is't so? I _can_ no longer what I _would_!
  No longer draw back at my liking! I
  Must _do_ the deed, because I _thought_ of it,
  And fed this heart here with a dream! Because
  I did not scowl temptation from my presence,
  Dallied with thought of possible fulfilment,
  Commenced no movement, left all time uncertain,
  And only kept the road, the access open!
  By the great God of Heaven! It was not
  My serious meaning, it was ne'er resolve.
  I but amused myself with thinking of it.
  The free-will tempted me, the power to do
  Or not to do it.--Was it criminal
  To make the fancy minister to hope,
  To fill the air with pretty toys of air,
  And clutch fantastic sceptres moving t'ward me?
  Was not the will kept free? Beheld I not
  The road of duty clear beside me--but
  One little step and once more I was in it!
  Where am I? Whither have I been transported?
  No road, no track behind one, but a wall,
  Impenetrable, insurmountable,
  Rises obedient to the spells I muttered
  And meant not--my own doings tower behind me.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *

EASY TO DRIFT.


  Easy to drift to the open sea,
  The tides are eager and swift and strong,
  And whistling and free are the rushing winds,--
  But O, to get back is hard and long.

  Easy as told in Arabian tale,
  To free from his jar the evil sprite
  Till he rises like smoke to stupendous size,--
  But O, nevermore can we prison him tight.

  Easy as told in an English tale,
  To fashion a Frankenstein, body and soul,
  And breathe in his bosom a breath of life,--
  But O, we create what we cannot control.

  Easy to drift to the sea of doubt,
  Easy to hurt what we cannot heal,
  Easy to rouse what we cannot soothe,
  Easy to speak what we do not feel,
  Easy to show what we ought to conceal,
  Easy to think that fancy is fate,--
  And O, the wisdom that comes too late!

OLIVER HUCKEL.


       *       *       *       *       *

FRANKFORD'S SOLILOQUY.

    FROM "A WOMAN KILLED WITH KINDNESS"


  O God! O God! that it were possible
  To undo things done; to call back yesterday!
  That time could turn up his swift sandy glass,
  To untell the days, and to redeem these hours!
                 Or that the sun
  Could, rising from the West, draw his coach backward,--
  Take from the account of time so many minutes.
  Till he had all these seasons called again,
  These minutes and these actions done in them.

THOMAS HEYWOOD.


       *       *       *       *       *

CONSCIENCE.

    FROM SATIRE XIII.


  The Spartan rogue who, boldly bent on fraud,
  Dared ask the god to sanction and applaud,
  And sought for counsel at the Pythian shrine,
  Received for answer from the lips divine,--
  "That he who doubted to restore his trust,
  And reasoned much, reluctant to be just,
  Should for those doubts and that reluctance prove
  The deepest vengeance of the powers above."
  The tale declares that not pronounced in vain
  Came forth the warning from the sacred fane:
  Ere long no branch of that devoted race
  Could mortal man on soil of Sparta trace!
  Thus but intended mischief, stayed in time,
  Had all the mortal guilt of finished crime.
    If such his fate who yet but darkly dares,
  Whose guilty purpose yet no act declares,
  What were it, done! Ah! now farewell to peace!
  Ne'er on this earth his soul's alarms shall cease!
  Held in the mouth that languid fever burns,
  His tasteless food he indolently turns;
  On Alba's oldest stock his soul shall pine!
  Forth from his lips he spits the joyless wine!
  Nor all the nectar of the hills shall now
  Or glad the heart, or smooth the wrinkled brow!
  While o'er the couch his aching limbs are cast,
  If care permit the brief repose at last,
  Lo! there the altar and the fane abused!
  Or darkly shadowed forth in dream confused,
  While the damp brow betrays the inward storm,
  Before him flits thy aggravated form!
  Then as new fears o'er all his senses press,
  Unwilling words the guilty truth confess!
  These, these be they whom secret terrors try.
  When muttered thunders shake the lurid sky;
  Whose deadly paleness now the gloom conceals
  And now the vivid flash anew reveals.
  No storm as Nature's casualty they hold.
  They deem without an aim no thunders rolled;
  Where'er the lightning strikes, the flash is thought
  Judicial fire, with Heaven's high vengeance fraught.
  Passes this by, with yet more anxious ear
  And greater dread, each future storm they fear;
  In burning vigil, deadliest foe to sleep,
  In their distempered frame if fever keep,
  Or the pained side their wonted rest prevent,
  Behold some incensed god his bow has bent!
  All pains, all aches, are stones and arrows hurled
  At bold offenders in this nether world!
  From them no crested cock acceptance meets!
  Their lamb before the altar vainly bleats!
  Can pardoning Heaven on guilty sickness smile?
  Or is there victim than itself more vile?
  Where steadfast virtue dwells not in the breast,
  Man is a wavering creature at the best!

From the Latin of JUVENAL.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE FOOLISH VIRGINS.


      The Queen looked up, and said,
  "O maiden, if indeed you list to sing,
  Sing, and unbind my heart, that I may weep."
  Whereat full willingly sang the little maid:

    "Late, late, so late! and dark the night and chill!
  Late, late, so late! but we can enter still.
  Too late, too late! Ye cannot enter now.

    "No light had we: for that we do repent;
  And learning this, the bridegroom will relent.
  Too late, too late! Ye cannot enter now.

    "No light; so late! and dark and chill the night!
  O, let us in, that we may find the light!
  Too late, too late! Ye cannot enter now.

    "Have we not heard the bridegroom is so sweet?
  O, let us in, though late, to kiss his feet!
  No, no, too late! Ye cannot enter now."

    So sang the novice, while full passionately,
  Her head upon her hands, wept the sad Queen.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

UP HILL.


  Does the road wind up hill all the way?
    _Yes, to the very end._
  Will the day's journey take the whole long day?
    _From morn to night, my friend_.

  But is there for the night a resting-place?
    _A roof for when the slow dark hours begin._
  May not the darkness hide it from my face?
    _You cannot miss that inn_.

  Shall I meet other wayfarers at night?
    _Those who have gone before._
  Then must I knock, or call when just in sight?
    _They will not keep you standing at that door_.

  Shall I find comfort, travel-sore and weak?
    _Of labor you shall find the sum._
  Will there be beds for me and all who seek?
    _Yea, beds for all who come_.

CHRISTINA G. ROSSETTI.


       *       *       *       *       *

PER PACEM AD LUCEM.


  I do not ask, O Lord, that life may be
    A pleasant road;
  I do not ask that Thou wouldst take from me
    Aught of its load;

  I do not ask that flowers should always spring
    Beneath my feet;
  I know too well the poison and the sting
    Of things too sweet.

  For one thing only, Lord, dear Lord, I plead,
    Lead me aright--
  Though strength should falter, and though heart should bleed--
    Through Peace to Light.

  I do not ask, O Lord, that thou shouldst shed
    Full radiance here;
  Give but a ray of peace, that I may tread
    Without a fear.

  I do not ask my cross to understand,
    My way to see;
  Better in darkness just to feel Thy hand
    And follow Thee.

  Joy is like restless day; but peace divine
    Like quiet night:
  Lead me, O Lord,--till perfect Day shall shine,
    Through Peace to Light.

ADELAIDE ANNE PROCTER.


       *       *       *       *       *

ON HIS BLINDNESS.


  When I consider how my light is spent
    Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
    And that one talent, which is death to hide,
    Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent
  To serve therewith my Maker, and present
    My true account, lest he returning chide;
    "Doth God exact day-labor, light denied?"
    I fondly ask. But Patience, to prevent
  That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need
    Either man's work or his own gifts; who best
    Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best: his state
  Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed,
    And post o'er land and ocean without rest;
    They also serve who only stand and wait."

MILTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MARTYRS' HYMN.


  Flung to the heedless winds,
    Or on the waters cast,
  The martyrs' ashes, watched,
    Shall gathered be at last;
  And from that scattered dust,
    Around us and abroad,
  Shall spring a plenteous seed
    Of witnesses for God.

  The Father hath received
    Their latest living breath;
  And vain is Satan's boast
    Of victory in their death;
  Still, still, though dead, they speak,
    And, trumpet-tongued, proclaim
  To many a wakening land
    The one availing name.

From the German of MARTIN LUTHER.

Translation of W.J. FOX.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE PILGRIMAGE.


  Give me my scallop-shell of quiet,
    My staff of faith to walk upon,
  My scrip of joy, immortal diet,
    My bottle of salvation,
  My gown of glory, hope's true gauge;
    And thus I'll take my pilgrimage!

  Blood must be my body's balmer,
    No other balm will there be given;
  Whilst my soul, like quiet palmer,
    Travelleth towards the land of Heaven,
  Over the silver mountains
    Where spring the nectar fountains:
          There will I kiss
          The bowl of bliss,
  And drink mine everlasting fill
  Upon every milken hill.
  My soul will be a-dry before,
  But after, it will thirst no more.

  Then by that happy, blissful day,
  More peaceful pilgrims I shall see,
  That have cast off their rags of clay,
  And walk apparelled fresh like me.
          I'll take them first
          To quench their thirst,
  And taste of nectar's suckets
          At those clear wells
          Where sweetness dwells
  Drawn up by saints in crystal buckets.

  And when our bottles and all we
  Are filled with immortality,
  Then the blest paths we'll travel,
  Strewed with rubies thick as gravel,--
  Ceilings of diamonds, sapphire floors.
  High walls of coral, and pearly bowers.
  From thence to Heaven's bribeless hall,
  Where no corrupted voices brawl;
  No conscience molten into gold,
  No forged accuser, bought or sold,
  No cause deferred, no vain-spent journey,
  For there Christ is the King's Attorney;
  Who pleads for all without degrees,
  And he hath angels, but no fees;
  And when the grand twelve-million jury
  Of our sins, with direful fury,
  'Gainst our souls black verdicts give,
  Christ pleads his death, and then we live.
  Be thou my speaker, taintless pleader,
  Unblotted lawyer, true proceeder!
  Thou giv'st salvation even for alms,--
  Not with a bribed lawyer's palms.
  And this is mine eternal plea
  To Him that made heaven, earth, and sea',
  That, since my flesh must die so soon,
  And want a head to dine next noon,
  Just at the stroke when my veins start and spread.
  Set on my soul an everlasting head:
  Then am I, like a palmer, fit
  To tread those blest paths which before I writ.

  Of death and judgment, heaven and hell,
  Who oft doth think, must needs die well.

SIR WALTER RALEIGH.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MASTER'S TOUCH.


  In the still air the music lies unheard;
    In the rough marble beauty hides unseen:
  To make the music and the beauty, needs
    The master's touch, the sculptor's chisel keen.

  Great Master, touch us with thy skilful hand;
    Let not the music that is in us die!
  Great Sculptor, hew and polish us; nor let,
    Hidden and lost, thy form within us lie!

  Spare not the stroke! do with us as thou wilt!
    Let there be naught unfinished, broken, marred;
  Complete thy purpose, that we may become
    Thy perfect image, thou our God and Lord!

HORATIUS BONAR.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE FAITHFUL ANGEL.

    FROM "PARADISE LOST," BOOK V.


          The seraph Abdiel, faithful found
  Among the faithless, faithful only he;
  Among innumerable false, unmoved,
  Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified,
  His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal;
  Nor number, nor example with him wrought
  To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind,
  Though single. From amidst them forth he passed,
  Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
  Superior, nor of violence feared aught;
  And with retorted scorn his back he turned
  On those proud towers to swift destruction doomed.

MILTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

LOW SPIRITS.


  Fever and fret and aimless stir
    And disappointed strife,
  All chafing, unsuccessful things,
    Make up the sum of life.

  Love adds anxiety to toil,
    And sameness doubles cares.
  While one unbroken chain of work
    The flagging temper wears.

  The light and air are dulled with smoke:
    The streets resound with noise;
  And the soul sinks to see its peers
    Chasing their joyless joys.

  Voices are round me; smiles are near;
    Kind welcomes to be had;
  And yet my spirit is alone,
    Fretful, outworn, and sad.

  A weary actor, I would fain
    Be quit of my long part;
  The burden of unquiet life
    Lies heavy on my heart.

  Sweet thought of God! now do thy work
    As thou hast done before;
  Wake up, and tears will wake with thee,
    And the dull mood be o'er.

  The very thinking of the thought
    Without or praise or prayer,
  Gives light to know, and life to do,
    And marvellous strength to bear.

  Oh, there is music in that thought,
    Unto a heart unstrung,
  Like sweet bells at the evening time,
    Most musically rung.

  'Tis not his justice or his power,
    Beauty or blest abode,
  But the mere unexpanded thought
    Of the eternal God.

  It is not of his wondrous works,
    Not even that he is;
  Words fail it, but it is a thought
    Which by itself is bliss.

  Sweet thought, lie closer to my heart!
    That I may feel thee near,
  As one who for his weapon feels
    In some nocturnal fear.

  Mostly in hours of gloom thou com'st,
    When sadness makes us lowly,
  As though thou wert the echo sweet
    Of humble melancholy.

  I bless thee. Lord, for this kind check
    To spirits over free!
    More helpless need of thee!
  And for all things that make me feel

FREDERICK WILLIAM FABER.


       *       *       *       *       *

I SAW THEE.

    "When thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee."


  I Saw thee when, as twilight fell,
    And evening lit her fairest star,
  Thy footsteps sought yon quiet dell,
    The world's confusion left afar.

  I saw thee when thou stood'st alone,
    Where drooping branches thick o'erhung,
  Thy still retreat to all unknown,
    Hid in deep shadows darkly flung.

  I saw thee when, as died each sound
    Of bleating flock or woodland bird,
  Kneeling, as if on holy ground,
    Thy voice the listening silence heard.

  I saw thy calm, uplifted eyes,
    And marked the heaving of thy breast,
  When rose to heaven thy heartfelt sighs
    For purer life, for perfect rest.

  I saw the light that o'er thy face
    Stole with a soft, suffusing glow,
  As if, within, celestial grace
    Breathed the same bliss that angels know.

  I saw--what thou didst not--above
    Thy lowly head an open heaven;
  And tokens of thy Father's love
    With smiles to thy rapt spirit given.

  I saw thee from that sacred spot
    With firm and peaceful soul depart;
  I, Jesus, saw thee,--doubt it not,--
    And read the secrets of thy heart!

RAY PALMER.


       *       *       *       *       *

LOSSE IN DELAYES.


  Shun delayes, they breed remorse,
  Take thy time while time doth serve thee,
  Creeping snayles have weakest force,
  Flie their fault, lest thou repent thee.
    Good is best when soonest wrought,
    Lingering labours come to nought.

  Hoyse up sayle while gale doth last,
  Tide and winde stay no man's pleasure;
  Seek not time when time is past,
  Sober speede is wisdome's leasure.
    After-wits are dearely bought,
    Let thy fore-wit guide thy thought.

  Time weares all his locks before,
  Take thou hold upon his forehead;
  When he flies, he turnes no more,
  And behind his scalpe is naked.
    Workes adjourned have many stayes,
    Long demurres breed new delayes.

  Seeke thy salve while sore is greene,
  Festered wounds aske deeper launcing;
  After-cures are seldome seene,
  Often sought, scarce ever chancing.
    Time and place gives best advice.
    Out of season, out of price.

  Crush the serpent in the head,
  Breake ill eggs ere they be hatched:
  Kill bad chickens in the tread;
  Fledged, they hardly can be catched:
    In the rising stifle ill,
    Lest it grow against thy will.

  Drops do pierce the stubborn flint,
  Not by force, but often falling;
  Custome kills with feeble dint.
  More by use than strength prevailing:
    Single sands have little weight,
    Many make a drowning freight.

  Tender twigs are bent with ease,
  Aged trees do breake with bending;
  Young desires make little prease,
  Growth doth make them past amending.
    Happie man that soon doth knocke,
    Babel's babes against the rocke.

ROBERT SOUTHWELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SEED GROWING SECRETLY.


  Dear, secret greenness! nurst below
    Tempests and winds and winter nights!
  Vex not, that but One sees thee grow;
    That One made all these lesser lights.

  What needs a conscience calm and bright
    Within itself, an outward test?
  Who breaks his glass, to take more light,
    Makes way for storms into his rest.

  Then bless thy secret growth, nor catch
    At noise, but thrive unseen and dumb;
  Keep clean, bear fruit, earn life, and watch
    Till the white-winged reapers come!

HENRY VAUGHAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

PATIENCE.


  She hath no beauty in her face
    Unless the chastened sweetness there,
  And meek long-suffering, yield a grace
    To make her mournful features fair:--

  Shunned by the gay, the proud, the young,
    She roams through dim, unsheltered ways;
  Nor lover's vow, nor flatterer's tongue
    Brings music to her sombre days:--

  At best her skies are clouded o'er,
    And oft she fronts the stinging sleet,
  Or feels on some tempestuous shore
    The storm-waves lash her naked feet.

  Where'er she strays, or musing stands
    By lonesome beach, by turbulent mart,
  We see her pale, half-tremulous hands
    Crossed humbly o'er her aching heart!

  Within, a secret pain she bears,--
    pain too deep to feel the balm
  An April spirit finds in tears;
    Alas! all cureless griefs are calm!

  Yet in her passionate strength supreme,
    Despair beyond her pathway flies,
  Awed by the softly steadfast beam
    Of sad, but heaven-enamored eyes!

  Who pause to greet her, vaguely seem
    Touched by fine wafts of holier air;
  As those who in some mystic dream
    Talk with the angels unaware!

PAUL HAMILTON HAYNE.


       *       *       *       *       *

SOMETIME.


  Sometime, when all life's lessons have been learned,
    And sun and stars forevermore have set,
  The things o'er which our weak judgments here have spurned,
    The things o'er which we grieved with lashes wet,
  Will flash before us, out of life's dark night,
    As stars shine most in deeper tints of blue;
  And we shall see how all God's plans are right,
    And how what seems reproof was love most true.

  And we shall see how, while we frown and sigh,
    God's plans go on as best for you and me;
  How, when we called, he heeded not our cry,
    Because his wisdom to the end could see.
  And e'en as prudent parents disallow
    Too much of sweet to craving babyhood,
  So God, perhaps, is keeping from us now
    Life's sweetest things, because it seemeth good.

  And if sometimes, commingled with life's wine,
    We find the wormwood, and rebel and shrink,
  Be sure a wiser hand than yours or mine
    Pours out this potion for our lips to drink.
  And if some friend we love is lying low,
    Where human kisses cannot reach his face,
  Oh, do not blame the loving Father so,
    But wear your sorrow with obedient grace!

  And you shall shortly know that lengthened breath
    Is not the sweetest gift God sends his friend,
  And that, sometimes, the sable pall of death
    Conceals the fairest bloom his love can send.
  If we could push ajar the gates of life,
    And stand within, and all God's workings see,
  We could interpret all this doubt and strife,
    And for each mystery could find a key.

  But not to-day. Then be content, poor heart!
    God's plans like lilies pure and white unfold.
  We must not tear the close-shut leaves apart,
    Time will reveal the calyxes of gold.
  And if, through patient toil, we reach the land
    Where tired feet, with sandals loosed, may rest,
  When we shall clearly know and understand,
    I think that we will say, "God knew the best!"

MAY RILEY SMITH.


       *       *       *       *       *

FATHER, THY WILL BE DONE!


  He sendeth sun, he sendeth shower,
  Alike they're needful for the flower;
  And joys and tears alike are sent
  To give the soul fit nourishment:
    As comes to me or cloud or sun,
    Father, thy will, not mine, be done!

  Can loving children e'er reprove
  With murmurs whom they trust and love?
  Creator, I would ever be
  A trusting, loving child to thee:
    As comes to me or cloud or sun,
    Father, thy will, not mine, be done!

  Oh, ne'er will I at life repine;
  Enough that thou hast made it mine;
  When falls the shadow cold of death,
  I yet will sing with parting breath:
    As comes to me or shade or sun,
    Father, thy will, not mine, be done!

SARAH FLOWER ADAMS.




VI.

DEATH: IMMORTALITY: HEAVEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROSPECT.


  Methinks we do as fretful children do,
    Leaning their faces on the window-pane
    To sigh the glass dim with their own breath's stain,
  And shut the sky and landscape from their view;
  And, thus, alas! since God the maker drew
    A mystic separation 'twixt those twain,--
    The life beyond us and our souls in pain,--
  We miss the prospect which we are called unto
  By grief we are fools to use. Be still and strong,
  O man, my brother! hold thy sobbing breath,
    And keep thy soul's large windows pure from wrong;
  That so, as life's appointment issueth,
    Thy vision may be clear to watch along
  The sunset consummation-lights of death.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOST PLEIAD.


  Not in the sky,
  Where it was seen,
  Nor on the white tops of the glistening wave,
  Nor in the mansions of the hidden deep,--
  Though green,
  And beautiful, its caves of mystery;--
  Shall the bright watcher have
  A place, and as of old high station keep.

  Gone, gone!
  Oh, never more to cheer
  The mariner who holds his course alone
  On the Atlantic, through the weary night,
  When the stars turn to watchers, and do sleep,
  Shall it appear,
  With the sweet fixedness of certain light,
  Down-shining on the shut eyes of the deep.

  Vain, vain!
  Hopeless most idly then, shall he look forth,
  That mariner from his bark.
  Howe'er the north
  Does raise his certain lamp, when tempests lower--
  He sees no more that perished light again!
  And gloomier grows the hour
  Which may not, through the thick and crowding dark,
  Restore that lost and loved one to her tower.

  He looks,--the shepherd of Chaldea's hills
  Tending his flocks,--
  And wonders the rich beacon does not blaze,
  Gladdening his gaze;--
  And from his dreary watch along the rocks,
  Guiding him safely home through perilous ways!
  Still wondering as the drowsy silence fills
  The sorrowful scene, and every hour distils
  Its leaden dews.--How chafes he at the night,
  Still slow to bring the expected and sweet light,
  So natural to his sight!

  And lone,
  Where its first splendors shone,
  Shall be that pleasant company of stars:
  How should they know that death
  Such perfect beauty mars?
  And like the earth, its crimson bloom and breath;
  Fallen from on high,
  Their lights grow blasted by its touch, and die!--
  All their concerted springs of harmony
  Snapped rudely, and the generous music gone.

  A strain--a mellow strain--
  A wailing sweetness filled the sky;
  The stars, lamenting in unborrowed pain,
  That one of their selectest ones must die!
  Must vanish, when most lovely, from the rest!
  Alas! 'tis evermore our destiny,
  The hope, heart-cherished, is the soonest lost;
  The flower first budden, soonest feels the frost:
  Are not the shortest-lived still loveliest?
  And, like the pale star shooting down the sky,
  Look they not ever brightest when they fly
  The desolate home they blessed?

WILLIAM GILMORE SIMMS.


       *       *       *       *       *

PASSING AWAY.


  Was it the chime of a tiny bell
    That came so sweet to my dreaming ear,
  Like the silvery tones of a fairy's shell
    That he winds, on the beach, so mellow and clear,
  When the winds and the waves lie together asleep,
  And the Moon and the Fairy are watching the deep,
  She dispensing her silvery light.
  And he his notes as silvery quite.
  While the boatman listens and ships his oar,
  To catch the music that comes from the shore?
  Hark! the notes on my ear that play
  Are set to words; as they float, they say,
      "Passing away! passing away!"

  But no; it was not a fairy's shell.
    Blown on the beach, so mellow and clear;
  Nor was it the tongue of a silver bell,
    Striking the hour, that filled my ear,
  As I lay in my dream; yet was it a chime
  That told of the flow of the stream of time.
  For a beautiful clock from the ceiling hung,
  And a plump little girl, for a pendulum, swung
  (As you've sometimes seen, in a little ring
  That hangs in his cage, a canary-bird swing);
  And she held to her bosom a budding bouquet,
  And, as she enjoyed it, she seemed to say,
      "Passing away! passing away!"

  Oh, how bright were the wheels, that told
    Of the lapse of time, as they moved round slow;
  And the hands, as they swept o'er the dial of gold,
    Seemed to point to the girl below.
  And lo! she had changed: in a few short hours
  Her bouquet had become a garland of flowers,
  That she held in her outstretched hands, and flung
  This way and that, as she, dancing, swung
  In the fulness of grace and of womanly pride,
  That told me she soon was to be a bride;
  Yet then, when expecting her happiest day,
  In the same sweet voice I heard her say,
      "Passing away! passing away!"

  While I gazed at that fair one's cheek, a shade
    Of thought or care stole softly over,
  Like that by a cloud in a summer's day made,
    Looking down on a field of blossoming clover.
  The rose yet lay on her cheek, but its flush
  Had something lost of its brilliant blush;
  And the light in her eye, and the light on the wheels,
  That marched so calmly round above her,
  Was a little dimmed,--as when evening steals
    Upon noon's hot face. Yet one couldn't but love her,
  For she looked like a mother whose first babe lay
  Rocked on her breast, as she swung all day;
  And she seemed, in the same silver tone, to say,
      "Passing away! passing away!"

  While yet I looked, what a change there came!
    Her eye was quenched, and her cheek was wan;
  Stooping and staffed was her withered frame,
    Yet just as busily swung she on;
  The garland beneath her had fallen to dust;
  The wheels above her were eaten with rust:
  The hands, that over the dial swept,
  Grew crooked and tarnished, but on they kept
  And still there came that silver tone
  From the shrivelled lips of the toothless crone
  (Let me never forget till my dying day
  The tone or the burden of her lay),
      "Passing away! passing away!"

JOHN PIERPONT.


       *       *       *       *       *

LINES

    FOUND IN HIS BIBLE IN THE GATE-HOUSE AT WESTMINSTER.


  E'en such is time; that takes in trust
    Our youth, our joys, our all we have,
  And pays us but with earth and dust;
  Who in the dark and silent grave,
  When we have wandered all our ways,
  Shuts up the story of our days:
  But from this earth, this grave, this dust,
  My God shall raise me up, I trust.

SIR WALTER RALEIGH.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY AIN COUNTREE.

    "But now they desire a better country, that is, an
    heavenly."--HEBREWS xi. 16.


  I'm far frae my hame, an' I'm weary aftenwhiles,
  For the langed-for hame-bringing, an' my Father's welcome smiles;
  I'll never be fu' content, until mine een do see
  The shining gates o' heaven an' my ain countree.

  The earth is flecked wi' flowers, mony-tinted, fresh, an' gay,
  The birdies warble blithely, for my Father made them sae;
  But these sights an' these soun's will as naething be to me,
  When I hear the angels singing in my ain countree.

  I've his gude word of promise that some gladsome day, the King
  To his ain royal palace his banished hame will bring:
  Wi' een an' wi' hearts runnin' owre, we shall see
  The King in his beauty in our ain countree.

  My sins hae been mony, an' my sorrows hae been sair,
  But there they'll never vex me, nor be remembered mair;
  His bluid has made me white, his hand shall dry mine e'e,
  When he brings me hame at last, to my ain countree.

  Like a bairn to its mither, a wee birdie to its nest,
  I wad fain be ganging noo, unto my Saviour's breast;
  For he gathers in his bosom, witless, worthless lambs like me,
  And carries them himse' to his ain countree.

  He's faithfu' that hath promised, he'll surely come again,
  He'll keep his tryst wi' me, at what hour I dinna ken;
  But he bids me still to wait, an' ready aye to be,
  To gang at ony moment to my ain countree.

  So I'm watching aye, an' singin' o' my hame as I wait,
  For the soun'ing o' his footfa' this side the shining gate;
  God gie his grace to ilk ane wha listens noo to me,
  That we a' may gang in gladness to our ain countree.

MARY LEE DEMAREST.


       *       *       *       *       *

COMING.

    "At even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the
    morning."--Mark xiii. 35.


  "It may be in the evening,
      When the work of the day is done,
  And you have time to sit in the twilight
      And watch the sinking sun,
  While the long bright day dies slowly
      Over the sea,
  And the hour grows quiet and holy
      With thoughts of me;
  While you hear the village children
      Passing along the street,
  Among those thronging footsteps
      May come the sound of _my_ feet.
  Therefore I tell you: Watch.
      By the light of the evening star,
  When the room is growing dusky
      As the clouds afar;
  Let the door be on the latch
    In your home,
  For it may be through the gloaming
    I will come.

  "It may be when the midnight
    Is heavy upon the land,
  And the black waves lying dumbly
    Along the sand;
  When the moonless night draws close,
  And the lights are out in the house;
  When the fires burn low and red,
  And the watch is ticking loudly
      Beside the bed:
  Though you sleep, tired out, on your couch,
  Still your heart must wake and watch
      In the dark room,
  For it may be that at midnight
      I will come.

  "It may be at the cock-crow,
  When the night is dying slowly
      In the sky,
  And the sea looks calm and holy,
      Waiting for the dawn
      Of the golden sun
      Which draweth nigh;
  When the mists are on the valleys, shading
      The rivers chill,
  And my morning-star is fading, fading
      Over the hill:
  Behold I say unto you: Watch;
  Let the door be on the latch
      In your home;
  In the chill before the dawning,
  Between the night and morning,
      I may come.

  "It may be in the morning,
      When the sun is bright and strong,
  And the dew is glittering sharply
      Over the little lawn;
  When the waves are laughing loudly
      Along the shore,
  And the little birds are singing sweetly
      About the door;
  With the long day's work before you,
      You rise up with the sun,
  And the neighbors come in to talk a little
      Of all that must be done.
  But remember that _I_ may be the next
      To come in at the door,
  To call you from all your busy work
      Forevermore:
  As you work your heart must watch,
  For the door is on the latch
      In your room,
  And it may be in the morning
      I will come."

  So He passed down my cottage garden,
      By the path that leads to the sea,
  Till he came to the turn of the little road
      Where the birch and laburnum tree
  Lean over and arch the way;
  There I saw him a moment stay,
      And turn once more to me,
      As I wept at the cottage door,
  And lift up his hands in blessing--
      Then I saw his face no more.

  And I stood still in the doorway,
      Leaning against the wall,
  Not heeding the fair white roses,
      Though I crushed them and let them fall.
  Only looking down the pathway,
      And looking toward the sea,
  And wondering, and wondering
      When he would come back for me;
  Till I was aware of an angel
      Who was going swiftly by,
  With the gladness of one who goeth
      In the light of God Most High.

  He passed the end of the cottage
      Toward the garden gate;
  (I suppose he was come down
  At the setting of the sun
  To comfort some one in the village
      Whose dwelling was desolate)
  And he paused before the door
      Beside my place,
  And the likeness of a smile
      Was on his face.
  "Weep not," he said, "for unto you is given
      To watch for the coming of his feet
  Who is the glory of our blessed heaven;
      The work and watching will be very sweet,
      Even in an earthly home;
  And in such an hour as you think not
      He will come."

  So I am watching quietly
      Every day.
  Whenever the sun shines brightly,
      I rise and say:
  "Surely it is the shining of his face!"
      And look unto the gates of his high place
      Beyond the sea;
  For I know he is coming shortly
      To summon me.
  And when a shadow falls across the window
      Of my room,
  Where I am working my appointed task,
  I lift my head to watch the door, and ask
      If he is come;
  And the angel answers sweetly
      In my home:
  "Only a few more shadows,
      And he will come."

BARBARA MILLER MACANDREW.


       *       *       *       *       *

EUTHANASIA.


  Methinks, when on the languid eye
    Life's autumn scenes grow dim;
  When evening's shadows veil the sky;
    And pleasure's siren hymn
  Grows fainter on the tuneless ear,
  Like echoes from another sphere,
    Or dreams of seraphim--
  It were not sad to cast away
  This dull and cumbrous load of clay.

  It were not sad to feel the heart
    Grow passionless and cold;
  To feel those longings to depart
    That cheered the good of old;
  To clasp the faith which looks on high,
  Which fires the Christian's dying eye,
    And makes the curtain-fold
  That falls upon his wasting breast,
  The door that leads to endless rest.

  It seems not lonely thus to lie
    On that triumphant bed,
  Till the pure spirit mounts on high
    By white-winged seraphs led:
  Where glories, earth may never know,
  O'er "many mansions" lingering glow,
    In peerless lustre shed.
  It were not lonely thus to soar
  Where sin and grief can sting no more.

  And though the way to such a goal
    Lies through the clouded tomb,
  If on the free, unfettered soul
    There rest no stains of gloom,
  How should its aspirations rise
  Far through the blue unpillared skies,
    Up to its final home,
  Beyond the journeyings of the sun,
  Where streams of living waters run!

WILLIS GAYLORD CLARK.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAST MAN.


  All worldly shapes shall melt in gloom,
  The Sun himself must die,
  Before this mortal shall assume
    Its immortality!
  I saw a vision in my sleep,
  That gave my spirit strength to sweep
    Adown the gulf of time!
  I saw the last of human mould
  That shall creation's death behold,
    As Adam saw her prime!

  The sun's eye had a sickly glare,
  The skeletons of nations were
    Around that lonely man!
  Some had expired in fight,--the brands
  Still rusted in their bony hands,
    In plague and famine some!
  Earth's cities had no sound nor tread;
  And ships were drifting with the dead
    To shores where all was dumb!

  Yet, prophet-like, that lone one stood,
    With dauntless words and high,
  That shook the sear leaves from the wood,
    As if a storm passed by,
  Saying, We are twins in death, proud Sun!
  Thy face is cold, thy race is run,
    'Tis Mercy bids thee go;
  For thou ten thousand thousand years
  Hast seen the tide of human tears,
    That shall no longer flow.

  What though beneath thee man put forth
    His pomp, his pride, his skill;
  And arts that made fire, flood, and earth
    The vassals of his will?
  Yet mourn I not thy parted sway,
  Thou dim, discrowned king of day;
    For all those trophied arts
  And triumphs that beneath thee sprang,
  Healed not a passion or a pang
    Entailed on human hearts.

  Go, let oblivion's curtain fall
    Upon the stage of men.
  Nor with thy rising beams recall
    Life's tragedy again:
  Its piteous pageants bring not back,
  Nor waken flesh, upon the rack
    Of pain anew to writhe;
  Stretched in disease's shapes abhorred,
  Or mown in battle by the sword,
    Like grass beneath the scythe.

  Even I am weary in yon skies
    To watch thy fading fire;
  Test of all sumless agonies,
    Behold not me expire.
  My lips, that speak thy dirge of death,--
  Their rounded gasp and gurgling breath
    To see thou shalt not boast.
  The eclipse of Nature spreads my pall,
  The majesty of darkness shall
    Receive my parting ghost!

  This spirit shall return to Him
    Who gave its heavenly spark;
  Yet think not, Sun, it shall be dim
    When thou thyself art dark!
  No! it shall live again, and shine
  In bliss unknown to beams of thine,
    By Him recalled to breath,
  Who captive led captivity,
  Who robbed the grave of victory,
    And took the sting from death!

  Go, Sun, while mercy holds me up
    On Nature's awful waste
  To drink this last and bitter cup
    Of grief that man shall taste,--
  Go, tell the night that hides thy face,
  Thou saw'st the last of Adam's race,
    On earth's sepulchral clod,
  The darkening universe defy
  To quench his immortality,
    Or shake his trust in God!

THOMAS CAMPBELL.


       *       *       *       *       *

WHEN.


  If I were told that I must die to-morrow,
        That the next sun
  Which sinks should bear me past all fear and sorrow
        For any one,
  All the fight fought, all the short journey through.
        What should I do?

  I do not think that I should shrink or falter,
        But just go on,
  Doing my work, nor change nor seek to alter
        Aught that is gone;
  But rise and move and love and smile and pray
        For one more day.

  And, lying down at night for a last sleeping,
        Say in that ear
  Which hearkens ever: "Lord, within thy keeping
        How should I fear?
  And when to-morrow brings thee nearer still,
        Do thou thy will."

  I might not sleep for awe; but peaceful, tender,
        My soul would lie
  All the night long; and when the morning splendor
        Flushed o'er the sky,
  I think that I could smile--could calmly say,
        "It is his day."

  But if a wondrous hand from the blue yonder
        Held out a scroll,
  On which my life was writ, and I with wonder
        Beheld unroll
  To a long century's end its mystic clew,
        What should I do?'

  What _could_ I do, O blessed Guide and Master,
        Other than this;
  Still to go on as now, not slower, faster,
        Nor fear to miss
  The road, although so very long it be,
        While led by thee?

  Step after step, feeling thee close beside me,
        Although unseen,
  Through thorns, through flowers, whether the tempest hide thee,
        Or heavens serene,
  Assured thy faithfulness cannot betray,
        Thy love decay.

  I may not know; my God, no hand revealeth
        Thy counsels wise;
  Along the path a deepening shadow stealeth,
        No voice replies
  To all my questioning thought, the time to tell;
        And it is well.

  Let me keep on, abiding and unfearing
        Thy will always,
  Through a long century's ripening fruition
        Or a short day's;
  Thou canst not come too soon; and I can wait
        If thou come late.

SARAH WOOLSEY (_Susan Coolidge_).


       *       *       *       *       *

BURIAL OF MOSES.

    "And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over
    against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto
    this day."--DEUTERONOMY xxxiv. 6.


  By Nebo's lonely mountain,
  On this side Jordan's wave,
  In a vale in the land of Moab,
  There lies a lonely grave;
  But no man built that sepulchre,
  And no man saw it e'er;
  For the angels of God upturned the sod,
  And laid the dead man there.

  That was the grandest funeral
  That ever passed on earth;
  Yet no man heard the trampling,
  Or saw the train go forth:
  Noiselessly as daylight
  Comes back when night is done,
  And the crimson streak on ocean's cheek
  Grows into the great sun;

  Noiselessly as the spring-time
  Her crown of verdure weaves,
  And all the trees on all the hills
  Unfold their thousand leaves:
  So without sound of music
  Or voice of them that wept,
  Silently down from the mountain's crown
  The great procession swept.

  Perchance the bald old eagle
  On gray Beth-peor's height
  Out of his rocky eyry
  Looked on the wondrous sight;
  Perchance the lion stalking
  Still shuns that hallowed spot;
  For beast and bird have seen and heard
  That which man knoweth not.

  But, when the warrior dieth.
  His comrades of the war.
  With arms reversed and muffled drums,
  Follow the funeral car:
  They show the banners taken;
  They tell his battles won;
  And after him lead his masterless steed,
  While peals the minute-gun.

  Amid the noblest of the land
  Men lay the sage to rest,
  And give the bard an honored place,
  With costly marbles drest,
  In the great minster transept
  Where lights like glories fall,
  And the sweet choir sings, and the organ rings
  Along the emblazoned hall.

  This was the bravest warrior
  That ever buckled sword;
  This the most gifted poet
  That ever breathed a word;
  And never earth's philosopher
  Traced with his glorious pen
  On the deathless page truths half so sage
  As he wrote down for men.

  And had he not high honor?--
  The hillside for a pall!
  To lie in state while angels wait,
  With stars for tapers tall!
  And the dark rock-pines, like tossing plumes,
  Over his bier to wave,
  And God's own hand, in that lonely land,
  To lay him in his grave!--

  In that strange grave without a name,
  Whence his uncoffined clay
  Shall break again--O wondrous thought!--
  Before the judgment day,
  And stand, with glory wrapped around
  On the hills he never trod,
  And speak of the strife that won our life
  With the incarnate Son of God.

  O lonely tomb in Moab's land!
  O dark Beth-peor's hill!
  Speak to these curious hearts of ours,
  And teach them to be still:
  God hath his mysteries of grace,
  Ways that we cannot tell,
  He hides them deep, like the secret sleep
  Of him he loved so well.

CECIL FRANCES ALEXANDER.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE RESIGNATION.


  O God, whose thunder shakes the sky,
    Whose eye this atom globe surveys,
  To thee, my only rock, I fly,
    Thy mercy in thy justice praise.

  The mystic mazes of thy will,
    The shadows of celestial light,
  Are past the power of human skill;
    But what the Eternal acts is right.

  Oh, teach me in the trying hour,
    When anguish swells the dewy tear,
  To still my sorrows, own my power,
    Thy goodness love, thy Justice fear.

  If in this bosom aught but thee
    Encroaching sought a boundless sway,
  Omniscience could the danger see,
    And Mercy look the cause away.

  Then why, my soul, dost thou complain,
    Why drooping seek the dark recess?
  Shake off the melancholy chain,
    For God created all to bless.

  But ah! my breast is human still;
    The rising sigh, the falling tear,
  My languid vitals' feeble rill,
    The sickness of my soul declare.

  But yet, with fortitude resigned,
    I'll thank the inflicter of the blow;
  Forbid the sigh, compose my mind,
    Nor let the gush of misery flow.

  The gloomy mantle of the night,
    Which on my sinking spirit steals,
  Will vanish at the morning light,
    Which God, my east, my sun, reveals.

THOMAS CHATTERTON.


       *       *       *       *       *

"ONLY WAITING."

    [A very aged man in an almshouse was asked what he was doing
    now. He replied, "Only waiting."]


  Only waiting till the shadows
    Are a little longer grown,
  Only waiting till the glimmer
    Of the day's last beam is flown;
  Till the night of earth is faded
    From the heart, once full of day;
  Till the stars of heaven are breaking
    Through the twilight soft and gray.

  Only waiting till the reapers
    Have the last sheaf gathered home,
  For the summer time is faded,
    And the autumn winds have come.
  Quickly, reapers! gather quickly
    The last ripe hours of my heart,
  For the bloom of life is withered,
    And I hasten to depart.

  Only waiting till the angels
    Open wide the mystic gate,
  At whose feet I long have lingered,
    Weary, poor, and desolate.
  Even now I hear the footsteps,
    And their voices far away;
  If they call me, I am waiting,
    Only waiting to obey.

  Only waiting till the shadows
    Are a little longer grown,
  Only waiting till the glimmer
    Of the day's last beam is flown.
  Then from out the gathered darkness,
    Holy, deathless stars shall rise,
  By whose light my soul shall gladly
    Tread its pathway to the skies.

FRANCES LAUGHTON MACE.


       *       *       *       *       *

HOPEFULLY WAITING.

    "Blessed are they who are homesick, for they shall come at
    last to their Father's house."--HEINRICH STILLING.


  Not as you meant, O learned man, and good!
    Do I accept thy words of truth and rest;
    God, knowing all, knows what for me is best,
  And gives me what I need, not what he could,
          Nor always as I would!
  I shall go to the Father's house, and see
    Him and the Elder Brother face to face,--
  What day or hour I know not. Let me be
    Steadfast in work, and earnest in the race,
      Not as a homesick child who all day long
      Whines at its play, and seldom speaks in song.

  If for a time some loved one goes away,
    And leaves us our appointed work to do,
    Can we to him or to ourselves be true
  In mourning his departure day by day,
          And so our work delay?
  Nay, if we love and honor, we shall make
    The absence brief by doing well our task,--
  Not for ourselves, but for the dear One's sake.
    And at his coming only of him ask
      Approval of the work, which most was done,
      Not for ourselves, but our Beloved One.

  Our Father's house, I know, is broad and grand;
    In it how many, many mansions are!
    And, far beyond the light of sun or star,
  Four little ones of mine through that fair land
          Are walking hand in hand!
  Think you I love not, or that I forget
    These of my loins? Still this world is fair,
  And I am singing while my eyes are wet
    With weeping in this balmy summer air:
      Yet I'm not homesick, and the children _here_
      Have need of me, and so my way is clear.

  I would be joyful as my days go by,
    Counting God's mercies to rue. He who bore
    Life's heaviest cross is mine forever-more,
  And I who wait his coming, shall not I
          On his sure word rely?
  And if sometimes the way be rough and steep,
    Be heavy for the grief he sends to me,
  Or at my waking I would only weep,
    Let me remember these are things to be,
      To work his blessed will until he comes
      To take my hand, and lead me safely home.

ANSON D.F. RANDOLPH.


       *       *       *       *       *

SIT DOWN, SAD SOUL.


  Sit down, sad soul, and count
    The moments flying;
  Come, tell the sweet amount
    That's lost by sighing!
  How many smiles?--a score?
  Then laugh, and count no more;
    For day is dying!

  Lie down, sad soul, and sleep,
    And no more measure
  The flight of time, nor weep
    The loss of leisure;
  But here, by this lone stream,
  Lie down with us, and dream
      Of starry treasure!

  We dream: do thou the same;
    We love,--forever;
  We laugh, yet few we shame,--
    The gentle never.
  Stay, then, till sorrow dies;
  Then--hope and happy skies
    Are thine forever!

BRYAN WALLER PROCTER. (_Barry Cornwall_.)


       *       *       *       *       *

IT KINDLES ALL MY SOUL.

    "Urit me Patriae decor."


      It kindles all my soul,
  My country's loveliness! Those starry choirs
      That watch around the pole,
  And the moon's tender light, and heavenly fires
      Through golden halls that roll.
  O chorus of the night! O planets, sworn
      The music of the spheres
  To follow! Lovely watchers, that think scorn
      To rest till day appears!
  Me, for celestial homes of glory born,
      Why here, O, why so long,
  Do ye behold an exile from on high?
      Here, O ye shining throng,
  With lilies spread the mound where I shall lie:
      Here let me drop my chain,
  And dust to dust returning, cast away
      The trammels that remain;
  The rest of me shall spring to endless day!

From the Latin of CASIMIR OF POLAND.


       *       *       *       *       *

EPILOGUE.


  At the midnight in the silence of the sleep-time.
    When you set your fancies free,
  Will they pass to where--by death, fools think, imprisoned--
  Low he lies who once so loved you, whom you loved so,
               --Pity me?

  Oh to love so, be so loved, yet so mistaken!
    What had I on earth to do
  With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly?
  Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless did I drivel
               --Being--who?

  One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
    Never doubted clouds would break,
  Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
  Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
               Sleep to wake.

  No, at noonday in the bustle of man's work-time
    Greet the unseen with a cheer!
  Bid him forward, breast and back as either should be,
  "Strive and thrive!" cry "Speed,--fight on, fare ever
               There as here!"

ROBERT BROWNING.


       *       *       *       *       *

CROSSING THE BAR.


  Sunset and evening star,
    And one clear call for me!
  And may there be no moaning of the bar,
    When I put out to sea,

  But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
    Too full for sound and foam,
  When that which drew from out the boundless deep
    Turns again home.

  Twilight and evening bell,
    And after that the dark!
  And may there be no sadness of farewell,
    When I embark;

  For tho' from out our bourne of Time and Place
    The flood may bear me far,
  I hope to see my Pilot face to face
    When I have crossed the bar.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE DYING CHRISTIAN TO HIS SOUL.


  Vital spark of heavenly flame!
  Quit, O quit this mortal frame!
  Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
  O, the pain, the bliss of dying!
  Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife,
  And let me languish into life!

  Hark! they whisper; angels say,
  Sister spirit, come away!
  What is this absorbs me quite?
  Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
  Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
  Tell me, my soul, can this be death?

  The world recedes; it disappears!
  Heaven opens on my eyes! my ears
    With sounds seraphic ring:
  Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
  O Grave! where is thy victory?
    O Death! where is thy sting?

ALEXANDER POPE.


       *       *       *       *       *

ODE.

    INTIMATIONS OF IMMORTALITY FROM RECOLLECTIONS OF EARLY
    CHILDHOOD.

  I.

  There was a time when meadow, grove and stream,
  The earth, and every common sight,
             To me did seem
          Apparelled in celestial light,--
  The glory and the freshness of the dream.
  It is not now as it hath been of yore:
            Turn wheresoe'er I may,
              By night or day,
  The things which I have seen I now can see no more.


  II.

              The rainbow comes and goes,
              And lovely is the rose;
              The moon doth with delight
  Look round her when the heavens are bare;
              Waters on a starry night
              Are beautiful and fair;
      The sunshine is a glorious birth;
      But yet I know, where'er I go,
  That there hath passed away a glory from the earth.


  III.

  Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
        And while the young lambs bound
          As to the tabor's sound,
  To me alone there came a thought of grief;
  A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
           And I again am strong.
  The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep,--
  No more shall grief of mine the season wrong.
  I hear the echoes through the mountains throng;
  The winds come to me from the fields of sleep,
          And all the earth is gay;
            Land and sea
        Give themselves up to jollity;
          And with the heart of May
        Doth every beast keep holiday;--
          Thou child of joy,
    Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy shepherd boy!


  IV.

  Ye blessed creatures! I have heard the call
      Ye to each other make; I see
  The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
      My heart is at your festival.
        My head hath its coronal,--
  The fulness of your bliss, I feel, I feel it all.
        O evil day! if I were sullen
        While Earth herself is adorning,
            This sweet May morning,
        And the children are culling,
        On every side,
    In a thousand valleys far and wide,
    Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,
  And the babe leaps up on his mother's arm;--
    I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!--
    But there's a tree, of many, one,
  A single field which I have looked upon,--
  Both of them speak of something that is gone;
        The pansy at my feet
        Doth the same tale repeat.
  Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
  Where is it now, the glory and the dream?


  V.

  Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
  The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
    Hath had elsewhere its setting,
      And cometh from afar:
    Not in entire forgetfulness,
    And not in utter nakedness,
  But trailing clouds of glory, do we come
    From God, who is our home:
  Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
  Shades of the prison-house begin to close
    Upon the growing Boy;
  But he beholds the light, and whence it flows--
    He sees it in his joy;
  The Youth, who daily farther from the east
    Must travel, still is nature's priest
    And by the vision splendid
    Is on his way attended:
  At length the Man perceives it die away,
  And fade into the light of common day.


  VI.

  Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own;
  Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
  And even with something of a mother's mind,
        And no unworthy aim,
        The homely nurse doth all she can
  To make her foster-child, her inmate man,
        Forget the glories he hath known,
  And that imperial palace whence he came.


  VII.

  Behold the child among his new-born blisses,--
  A six years' darling of a pygmy size!
  See, where mid work of his own hand he lies,
  Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses,
  With light upon him from his father's eyes!
  See, at his feet, some little plan or chart,
  Some fragment from his dream of human life,
  Shaped by himself with newly learned art,--
        A wedding or a festival,
        A mourning or a funeral;--
          And this hath now his heart,
        And unto this he frames his song:
          Then will he fit his tongue
  To dialogues of business, love, or strife;
         But it will not be long
         Ere this be thrown aside,
         And with new joy and pride
  The little actor cons another part,--
  Filling from time to time his "humorous stage"
  With all the persons, down to palsied age,
  That Life brings with her in her equipage;
        As if his whole vocation
        Were endless imitation.


  VIII.

  Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie
        Thy soul's immensity!
  Thou best philosopher, who yet dost keep
  Thy heritage! thou eye among the blind,
  That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep,
  Haunted forever by the eternal mind!--
        Mighty prophet! Seer blest!
        On whom those truths do rest
  Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
  In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;
  Thou over whom thy immortality
  Broods like the day, a master o'er a slave,
  A presence which is not to be put by;
  Thou little child, yet glorious in the might
  Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height,
  Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
  The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
  Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?
  Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight,
  And custom lie upon thee with a weight
  Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!


  IX.

  O joy! that in our embers
    Is something that doth live;
  That Nature yet remembers
    What was so fugitive!

  The thought of our past years in me doth breed
  Perpetual benediction: not, indeed,
  For that which is most worthy to be blest,--
  Delight and liberty, the simple creed
  Of childhood, whether busy or at rest,
  With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--
        Not for these I raise
        The song of thanks and praise;
      But for those obstinate questionings
      Of sense and outward things,
      Fallings from us, vanishings;
      Blank misgivings of a creature
  Moving about in worlds not realized,
  High instincts, before which our mortal nature
  Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised:
        But for those first affections,
        Those shadowy recollections,
      Which, be they what they may,
  Are yet the fountain-light of all our day,
  Are yet a master light of all our seeing;
      Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
  Our noisy years seem moments in the being
      Of the eternal silence: truths that wake,
          To perish never;
  Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavor,
          Nor man nor boy,
  Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
  Can utterly abolish or destroy!
      Hence, in a season of calm weather.
        Though inland far we be,
  Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
        Which brought us hither,--
      Can in a moment travel thither,
  And see the children sport upon the shore,
  And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.


  X.

  Then sing, ye birds, sing, sing a joyous song!
        And let the young lambs bound
        As to the tabor's sound!
  We in thought will join your throng,
        Ye that pipe and ye that play,
        Ye that through your hearts to-day
        Feel the gladness of the May!
  What though the radiance which was once so
          bright
  Be now forever taken from my sight,
        Though nothing can bring back the hour
  Of splendor in the grass, of glory in the flower;
        We will grieve not, rather find
        Strength in what remains behind;
        In the primal sympathy
        Which, having been, must ever be;
        In the soothing thoughts that spring
        Out of human suffering;
        In the faith that looks through death,
  In years that bring the philosophic mind.


  XI

  And O ye fountains, meadows, hills, and groves,
  Forebode not any severing of our loves!
  Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
  I only have relinquished one delight
  To live beneath your more habitual sway.
  I love the brooks which down their channels fret,
  Even more than when I tripped lightly as they;
  The innocent brightness of a new-born day
        Is lovely yet;
  The clouds that gather round the setting sun
  Do take a sober coloring from an eye
  That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality;
  Another race hath been, and other palms are won.
  Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
  Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,--
  To me the meanest flower that blows can give
  Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.


       *       *       *       *       *

SOLILOQUY: ON IMMORTALITY.

    FROM "CATO," ACT V. SC. I.

    SCENE.--CATO, _sitting in a thoughtful posture, with book on
    the Immortality of the Soul in his hand, and a drawn sword on
    the table by him_.


  It must be so--Plato, thou reasonest well!--
  Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire.
  This longing after immortality?
  Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror,
  Of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul
  Back on herself, and startles at destruction?
  'Tis the divinity that stirs within us;
  'Tis Heaven itself, that points out a hereafter,
  And intimates eternity to man.
    Eternity!--thou pleasing, dreadful thought!
  Through what variety of untried being,
  Through what new scenes and changes, must we pass!
  The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before me;
  But shadows, clouds, and darkness rest upon it.
  Here will I hold. If there's a Power above us
  (And that there is, all Nature cries aloud
  Through all her works), he must delight in virtue;
  And that which he delights in must be happy.
  But when? or where? This world was made for Cæsar.
  I'm weary of conjectures,--this must end 'em.

  _(Laying his hand on his sword.)_

    Thus am I doubly armed: my death and life,
  My bane and antidote, are both before me:
  This in a moment brings me to an end;
  But this informs me I shall never die.
  The soul, secured in her existence, smiles
  At the drawn dagger, and defies its point.
  The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
  Grow dim with age, and Nature sink in years;
  But thou shalt flourish in immortal youth,
  Unhurt amid the war of elements,
  The wrecks of matter, and the crush of worlds!

JOSEPH ADDISON.


       *       *       *       *       *

EDWIN AND PAULINUS:

    THE CONVERSION OF NORTHUMBRIA.


  The black-haired gaunt Paulinus
    By ruddy Edwin stood:--
  "Bow down, O king of Deira,
    Before the blessed Rood!
  Cast out thy heathen idols.
    And worship Christ our Lord."
  --But Edwin looked and pondered,
    And answered not a word.

  Again the gaunt Paulinus
    To ruddy Edwin spake:
  "God offers life immortal
    For his dear Son's own sake!
  Wilt thou not hear his message,
    Who bears the keys and sword?"
  --But Edwin looked and pondered,
    And answered not a word.

  Rose then a sage old warrior
    Was fivescore winters old;
  Whose beard from chin to girdle
    Like one long snow-wreath rolled:
  "At Yule-time in our chamber
    We sit in warmth and light,
  While cold and howling round us
    Lies the black land of Night.

  "Athwart the room a sparrow
    Darts from the open door:
  Within the happy hearth-light
    One red flash,--and no more!
  We see it come from darkness,
    And into darkness go:--
  So is our life. King Edwin!
    Alas, that it is so!

  "But if this pale Paulinus
    Have somewhat more to tell;
  Some news of Whence and Whither,
    And where the soul will dwell;--
  If on that outer darkness
    The sun of hope may shine;--
  He makes life worth the living!
    I take his God for mine!"

  So spake the wise old warrior;
    And all about him cried,
  "Paulinus' God hath conquered!
    And he shall be our guide:--
  For he makes life worth living
    Who brings this message plain,
  When our brief days are over,
    That we shall live again."

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY.


        Could we but know
  The land that ends our dark, uncertain travel,
    Where lie those happier hills and meadows low;
  Ah! if beyond the spirit's inmost cavil
    Aught of that country could we surely know,
        Who would not go?

        Might we but hear
  The hovering angels' high imagined chorus,
    Or catch, betimes, with wakeful eyes and clear
  One radiant vista of the realm before us,--
    With one rapt moment given to see and hear,
        Ah, who would fear?

        Were we quite sure
  To find the peerless friend who left us lonely,
    Or there, by some celestial stream as pure,
  To gaze in eyes that here were lovelit only,--
    This weary mortal coil, were we quite sure,
        Who would endure?

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

SONG OF THE SILENT LAND.

    "Das stille Land."


          Into the Silent Land!
      Ah, who shall lead us thither?
  Clouds in the evening sky more darkly gather,
  And shattered wrecks lie thicker on the strand.
      Who leads us with a gentle hand
            Thither, oh, thither,
          Into the Silent Land?

           Into the Silent Land!
       To you, ye boundless regions
  Of all perfection! Tender morning-visions
    Of beauteous souls! The future's pledge and band!
      Who in life's battle firm doth stand
       Shall bear hope's tender blossoms
         Into the Silent Land!

          O Land! O Land!
      For all the broken-hearted
  The mildest herald by our fate allotted
    Beckons, and with inverted torch doth stand
      To lead us with a gentle hand
  Into the land of the great departed,
        Into the Silent Land!

JOHANN GAUDENZ VON SALIS.

Translation of H.W. LONGFELLOW.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE OTHER WORLD.


  It lies around us like a cloud,--
    A world we do not see;
  Yet the sweet closing of an eye
    May bring us there to be.

  Its gentle breezes fan our cheek;
    Amid our worldly cares
  Its gentle voices whisper love,
    And mingle with our prayers.

  Sweet hearts around us throb and beat,
    Sweet helping hands are stirred,
  And palpitates the veil between
    With breathings almost heard.

  The silence--awful, sweet, and calm--
    They have no power to break;
  For mortal words are not for them
    To utter or partake.

  So thin, so soft, so sweet they glide,
    So near to press they seem,--
  They seem to lull us to our rest,
    And melt into our dream.

  And in the bush of rest they bring
    'Tis easy now to see
  How lovely and how sweet a pass
    The hour of death may be.

  To close the eye, and close the ear,
    Rapt in a trance of bliss,
  And gently dream in loving arms
    To swoon to that--from this.

  Scarce knowing if we wake or sleep,
    Scarce asking where we are,
  To feel all evil sink away,
    All sorrow and all care.

  Sweet souls around us! watch us still,
    Press nearer to our side,
  Into our thoughts, into our prayers,
    With gentle helpings glide.

  Let death between us be as naught,
    A dried and vanished stream;
  Your joy be the reality.
    Our suffering life the dream.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.


       *       *       *       *       *

HEAVEN.


  I never saw a moor,
    I never saw the sea;
  Yet know I how the heather looks,
    And what a wave must be.

  I never spake with God,
    Nor visited in heaven;
  Yet certain am I of the spot
    As if the chart were given.

EMILY DICKINSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

THOUGHTS OF HEAVEN.


  High thoughts!
    They come and go,
      Like the soft breathings of a listening maiden,
    While round me flow
      The winds, from woods and fields with gladness laden:
  When the corn's rustle on the ear doth come--
  When the eve's beetle sounds its drowsy hum--
  When the stars, dew-drops of the summer sky,
  Watch over all with soft and loving eye--
        While the leaves quiver
        By the lone river,
          And the quiet heart
            From depths doth call
            And garners all--
          Earth grows a shadow
            Forgotten whole,
          And heaven lives
            In the blessed soul!

  High thoughts
    They are with me
      When, deep within the bosom of the forest,
    Thy mourning melody
      Abroad into the sky, thou, throstle! pourest.
  When the young sunbeams glance among the trees--
  When on the ear comes the soft song of bees--
  When every branch has its own favorite bird
  And songs of summer from each thicket heard!--
        Where the owl flitteth,
        Where the roe sitteth,
          And holiness
            Seems sleeping there;
            While nature's prayer
          Goes up to heaven
            In purity,
          Till all is glory
            And joy to me!

  High thoughts!
    They are my own
      When I am resting on a mountain's bosom,
    And see below me strown
      The huts and homes where humble virtues blossom;
  When I can trace each streamlet through the meadow,
  When I can follow every fitful shadow--
  When I can watch the winds among the corn,
  And see the waves along the forest borne;
        Where blue-bell and heather
        Are blooming together,
          And far doth come
            The Sabbath bell,
            O'er wood and fell;
          I hear the beating
            Of nature's heart:
          Heaven is before me--
            God! thou art.

  High thoughts!
    They visit us
      In moments when the soul is dim and darkened;
    They come to bless,
      After the vanities to which we hearkened:
  When weariness hath come upon the spirit--
  (Those hours of darkness which we all inherit)--
  Bursts there not through a glint of warm sunshine,
  A wingèd thought which bids us not repine?
        In joy and gladness,
        In mirth and sadness,
          Come signs and tokens;
            Life's angel brings,
            Upon its wings,
          Those bright communings
            The soul doth keep--
          Those thoughts of heaven
            So pure and deep!

ROBERT NICOLL.


       *       *       *       *       *

NEARER HOME.


  One sweetly solemn thought
    Comes to me o'er and o'er;
  I am nearer home to-day
    That I ever have been before;

  Nearer my Father's house,
    Where the many mansions be;
  Nearer the great white throne,
    Nearer the crystal sea;

  Nearer the bound of life,
    Where we lay our burdens down;
  Nearer leaving the cross,
    Nearer gaining the crown!

  But lying darkly between,
    Winding down through the night,
  Is the silent, unknown stream.
    That leads at last to the light.

  Closer and closer my steps
    Come to the dread abysm:
  Closer Death to my lips
    Presses the awful chrism.

  Oh, if my mortal feet
    Have almost gained the brink;
  If it be I am nearer home
    Even to-day than I think;

  Father, perfect my trust;
    Let my spirit feel in death,
  That her feet are firmly set
    On the rock of a living faith!

PHOEBE CARY.


       *       *       *       *       *

MEETING ABOVE.


  If yon bright stars which gem the night
    Be each a blissful dwelling-sphere
  Where kindred spirits reunite
    Whom death hath torn asunder here,--
  How sweet it were at once to die,
    To leave this blighted orb afar!
  Mixt soul and soul to cleave the sky,
    And soar away from star to star.

  But oh, how dark, how drear, how lone,
    Would seem the brightest world of bliss,
  If, wandering through each radiant one,
    We failed to meet the loved of this!
  If there no more the ties shall twine
    Which death's cold hand alone could sever,
  Ah, would those stars in mockery shine,
    More joyless, as they shine forever!

  It cannot be,--each hope, each fear
    That lights the eye or clouds the brow,
  Proclaims there is a happier sphere
    Than this bleak world that holds us now.
  There, Lord, thy wayworn saints shall find
    The bliss for which they longed before;
  And holiest sympathies shall bind
    Thine own to thee forevermore.

  O Jesus, bring us to that rest,
    Where all the ransomed shall be found,
  In thine eternal fulness blest,
    While ages roll their cycles round.

WILLIAM LEGGETT.


       *       *       *       *       *

MY DAYS AMONG THE DEAD.


  My days among the dead are passed;
    Around me I behold,
  Where'er these casual eyes are cast,
    The mighty minds of old;
  My never-failing friends are they,
  With whom I converse day by day.

  With them I take delight in weal,
    And seek relief in woe;
  And while I understand and feel
    How much to them I owe,
  My cheeks have often been bedewed
  With tears of thoughtful gratitude.

  My thoughts are with the dead; with them
    I live in long-past years;
  Their virtues love, their faults condemn,
    Partake their hopes and fears,
  And from their lessons seek and find
  Instruction with an humble mind.

  My hopes are with the dead; anon
    My place with them will be.
  And I with them shall travel on
    Through all futurity:
  Yet leaving here a name, I trust,
  That will not perish in the dust.

ROBERT SOUTHEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE FUTURE LIFE.


  How shall I know thee in the sphere which keeps
    The disembodied spirits of the dead,
  When all of thee that time could wither sleeps
    And perishes among the dust we tread?

  For I shall feel the sting of ceaseless pain
    If there I meet thy gentle presence not;
  Nor hear the voice I love, nor read again
    In thy serenest eyes the tender thought.

  Will not thy own meek heart demand me there?
    That heart whose fondest throbs to me were given;
  My name on earth was ever in thy prayer,
    And wilt thou never utter it in heaven?

  In meadows fanned by heaven's life-breathing wind,
    In the resplendence of that glorious sphere,
  And larger movements of the unfettered mind,
    Wilt thou forget the love that joined us here?

  The love that lived through all the stormy past,
    And meekly with my harsher nature bore,
  And deeper grew, and tenderer to the last.
    Shall it expire with life, and be no more?

  A happier lot than mine, and larger light,
    Await thee there; for thou hast bowed thy will
  In cheerful homage to the rule of right,
    And lovest all, and renderest good for ill.

  For me, the sordid cares in which I dwell,
    Shrink and consume my heart, as heat the scroll;
  And wrath has left its scar--that fire of hell
    Has left its frightful scar upon my soul.

  Yet though thou wear'st the glory of the sky,
    Wilt thou not keep the same belovèd name,
  The same fair thoughtful brow, and gentle eye,
    Lovelier in heaven's sweet climate, yet the same?

  Shalt thou not teach me, in that calmer home,
    The wisdom that I learned so ill in this--
  The wisdom which is love--till I become
    Thy fit companion in that land of bliss?

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT


       *       *       *       *       *

HEAVEN.


  That clime is not like this dull clime of ours;
    All, all is brightness there;
  A sweeter influence breathes around its flowers,
    And a benigner air.
  No calm below is like that calm above,
  No region here is like that realm of love;
  Earth's softest spring ne'er shed so soft a light,
  Earth's brightest summer never shone so bright.

  That sky is not like this sad sky of ours,
    Tinged with earth's change and care;
  No shadow dims it, and no rain-cloud lowers;
    No broken sunshine there:
  One everlasting stretch of azure pours
  Its stainless splendor o'er those sinless shores;
  For there Jehovah shines with heavenly ray,
  And Jesus reigns, dispensing endless day.

  The dwellers there are not like those of earth,--
    No mortal stain they bear,--
  And yet they seem of kindred blood and birth;
    Whence and how came they there?
  Earth was their native soil; from sin and shame,
  Through tribulation, they to glory came;
  Bond-slaves delivered from sin's crushing load,
  Brands plucked from burning by the hand of God.

  Yon robes of theirs are not like those below;
    No angel's half so bright;
  Whence came that beauty, whence that living glow,
    And whence that radiant white?
  Washed in the blood of the atoning Lamb,
  Fair as the light these robes of theirs became;
  And now, all tears wiped off from every eye,
  They wander where the freshest pastures lie,
  Through all the nightless day of that unfading sky!

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE TWO WORLDS.


  Two worlds there are. To one our eyes we strain,
  Whose magic joys we shall not see again;
    Bright haze of morning veils its glimmering shore.
      Ah, truly breathed we there
      Intoxicating air--
    Glad were our hearts in that sweet realm of
        Nevermore.

  The lover there drank her delicious breath
  Whose love has yielded since to change or death;
    The mother kissed her child, whose days are o'er.
      Alas! too soon have fled
      The irreclaimable dead:
    We see them--visions strange--amid the
        Nevermore.

  The merrysome maiden used to sing--
  The brown, brown hair that once was wont to cling
    To temples long clay-cold: to the very core
      They strike our weary hearts,
      As some vexed memory starts
    From that long faded land--the realm of
        Nevermore.

  It is perpetual summer there. But here
  Sadly may we remember rivers clear,
    And harebells quivering on the meadow-floor.
      For brighter bells and bluer,
      For tenderer hearts and truer
    People that happy land--the realm of
        Nevermore.

  Upon the frontier of this shadowy land
  We pilgrims of eternal sorrow stand:
    What realm lies forward, with its happier store
      Of forests green and deep,
      Of valleys hushed in sleep,
    And lakes most peaceful? 'Tis the land of
        Evermore.

  Very far off its marble cities seem--
  Very far off--beyond our sensual dream--
    Its woods, unruffled by the wild wind's roar;
      Yet does the turbulent surge
      Howl on its very verge.
    One moment--and we breathe within the
        Evermore.

  They whom we loved and lost so long ago
  Dwell in those cities, far from mortal woe--
    Haunt those fresh woodlands, whence sweet carollings soar.
      Eternal peace have they;
      God wipes their tears away:
    They drink that river of life which flows from
        Evermore.

  Thither we hasten through these regions dim,
  But, lo, the wide wings of the Seraphim
    Shine in the sunset! On that joyous shore
      Our lightened hearts shall know
      The life of long ago:
    The sorrow-burdened past shall fade for
        Evermore.

MORTIMER COLLINS.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE ANSWER.


            "Who would not go"
  With buoyant steps, to gain that blessed portal,
    Which opens to the land we long to know?
  Where shall be satisfied the soul's immortal,
    Where we shall drop the wearying and the woe
            In resting so?

            "Ah, who would fear?"
  Since, sometimes through the distant pearly portal,
    Unclosing to some happy soul a-near,
  We catch a gleam of glorious light immortal,
    And strains of heavenly music faintly hear,
            Breathing good cheer!

            "Who would endure"
  To walk in doubt and darkness with misgiving,
    When he whose tender promises are sure--
  The Crucified, the Lord, the Ever-living--
    Keeps us those "mansions" evermore secure
            By waters pure?

            Oh, wondrous land!
  Fairer than all our spirit's fairest dreaming:
    "Eye hath not seen," no heart can understand
  The things prepared, the cloudless radiance streaming.
    How longingly we wait our Lord's command--
            His opening hand!

            O dear ones there!
  Whose voices, hushed, have left our pathway lonely,
    We come, erelong, your blessèd home to share;
  We take the guiding hand, we trust it only--
    Seeing, by faith, beyond this clouded air,
            That land so fair!

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

FOREVER WITH THE LORD.


    Forever with the Lord!
    Amen! so let it be!
  Life from the dead is in that word,
    And immortality.

    Here in the body pent,
    Absent from him I roam,
  Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
    A day's march nearer home.

    My Father's house on high,
    Home of my soul! how near,
  At times, to faith's foreseeing eye
    Thy golden gates appear!

    Ah! then my spirit faints
    To reach the land I love,
  The bright inheritance of saints,
    Jerusalem above!

    Yet clouds will intervene,
    And all my prospect flies;
  Like Noah's dove, I flit between
    Rough seas and stormy skies.

    Anon the clouds depart,
    The winds and waters cease;
  While sweetly o'er my gladdened heart
    Expands the bow of peace!

    Beneath its glowing arch,
    Along the hallowed ground,
  I see cherubic armies march,
    A camp of fire around.

    I hear at morn and even,
    At noon and midnight hour,
  The choral harmonies of heaven
    Earth's Babel tongues o'erpower.

    Then, then I feel that he,
    Remembered or forgot,
  The Lord, is never far from me,
    Though I perceive him not.

    In darkness as in light,
    Hidden alike from view,
  I sleep, I wake, as in his sight
    Who looks all nature through.

    All that I am, have been,
    All that I yet may be,
  He sees at once, as he hath seen,
    And shall forever see.

    "Forever with the Lord;"
    Father, if 'tis thy will,
  The promise of that faithful word
    Unto thy child fulfil!

    So, when my latest breath
    Shall rend the veil in twain,
  By death I shall escape from death,
    And life eternal gain.

JAMES MONTGOMERY.


       *       *       *       *       *

TO HEAVEN APPROACHED A SUFI SAINT.


  To heaven approached a Sufi Saint,
    From groping in the darkness late,
  And, tapping timidly and faint,
    Besought admission at God's gate.

  Said God, "Who seeks to enter here?"
    "'Tis I, dear Friend," the Saint replied,
  And trembling much with hope and fear.
    "If it be _thou_, without abide."

  Sadly to earth the poor Saint turned,
    To bear the scourging of life's rods;
  But aye his heart within him yearned
    To mix and lose its love in God's.

  He roamed alone through weary years,
    By cruel men still scorned and mocked,
  Until from faith's pure fires and tears
    Again he rose, and modest knocked.

  Asked God, "Who now is at the door?"
    "It is thyself, belovèd Lord,"
  Answered the Saint, in doubt no more,
    But clasped and rapt in his reward.

From the Persian of JALLAL-AD-DIN RUMI.

Translation of WILLIAM R. ALGER.


       *       *       *       *       *

MATTER AND MAN IMMORTAL.

    FROM "NIGHT THOUGHTS," NIGHT VI.


  As in a wheel, all sinks, to reascend:
  Emblems of man, who passes, not expires.
    With this minute distinction, emblems just,
  Nature revolves, but man advances; both
  Eternal, that a circle, this a line.
  That gravitates, this soars. Th' aspiring soul,
  Ardent, and tremulous, like flame, ascends,
  Zeal and humility her wings, to Heaven.
  The world of matter, with its various forms,
  All dies into new life. Life born from death
  Rolls the vast mass, and shall for ever roll.
  No single atom, once in being, lost,
  With change of counsel charges the Most High.
    What hence infers Lorenzo? Can it be?
  Matter immortal? And shall spirit die?
  Above the nobler, shall less noble rise?
  Shall man alone, for whom all else revives,
  No resurrection know? Shall man alone,
  Imperial man! be sown in barren ground,
  Less privileged than grain, on which he feeds?

       *       *       *       *       *

  Look Nature through, 'tis neat gradation all.
  By what minute degrees her scale ascends!
  Each middle nature joined at each extreme,
  To that above is joined, to that beneath;
  Parts, into parts reciprocally shot,
  Abhor divorce: what love of union reigns!
  Here, dormant matter waits a call to life;
  Half-life, half-death, joined there; here life and sense;
  There, sense from reason steals a glimmering ray;
  Reason shines out in man. But how preserved
  The chain unbroken upward, to the realms
  Of incorporeal life? those realms of bliss
  Where death hath no dominion? Grant a make
  Half-mortal, half-immortal; earthy, part,
  And part ethereal; grant the soul of man
  Eternal; or in man the series ends.
  Wide yawns the gap; connection is no more;
  Checked Reason halts; her next step wants support;
  Striving to climb, she tumbles from her scheme.

DR. EDWARD YOUNG.


       *       *       *       *       *

LIFE.

    FROM "FESTUS," SCENE "A COUNTRY TOWN."


  FESTUS.--                      Oh! there is
  A life to come, or all's a dream.

  LUCIFER.--                         And all
  May be a dream. Thou seest in thine, men, deeds,
  Clear, moving, full of speech and order; then
  Why may not all this world be but a dream
  Of God's? Fear not! Some morning God may waken.

  FESTUS.--I would it were. This life's a mystery.
  The value of a thought cannot be told;
  But it is clearly worth a thousand lives
  Like many men's. And yet men love to live
  As if mere life were worth their living for.
  What but perdition will it be to most?
  Life's more than breath and the quick round of blood;
  It is a great spirit and a busy heart.
  The coward and the small in soul scarce do live.
  One generous feeling--one great thought--one deed
  Of good, ere night, would make life longer seem
  Than if each year might number a thousand days,
  Spent as is this by nations of mankind.
  We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts, not breaths;
  In feelings, not in figures on a dial.
  We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives
  Who thinks most--feels the noblest--acts the best.
  Life's but a means unto an end--that end
  Beginning, mean, and end to all things--God.

PHILIP JAMES BAILEY.


       *       *       *       *       *

HEAVEN.


  O beauteous God! uncircumscribèd treasure
  Of an eternal pleasure!
  Thy throne is seated far
  Above the highest star,
  Where thou preparest a glorious place,
  Within the brightness of thy face,
  For every spirit
  To inherit
  That builds his hopes upon thy merit,
  And loves thee with a holy charity.
  What ravished heart, seraphic tongue, or eyes
  Clear as the morning rise,
  Can speak, or think, or see
  That bright eternity,
  Where the great King's transparent throne
  Is of an entire jasper stone?
  There the eye
  O' the chrysolite,
  And a sky
  Of diamonds, rubies, chrysoprase,--
  And above all thy holy face,--
  Makes an eternal charity.
  When thou thy jewels up dost bind, that day
  Remember us, we pray,--
  That where the beryl lies,
  And the crystal 'bove the skies,
  There thou mayest appoint us place
  Within the brightness of thy face,--
  And our soul
  In the scroll
  Of life and blissfulness enroll,
  That we may praise thee to eternity. Allelujah!

JEREMY TAYLOR.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE SPIRIT-LAND.


  Father! thy wonders do not singly stand,
  Nor far removed where feet have seldom strayed;
  Around us ever lies the enchanted land,
  In marvels rich to thine own sons displayed.
  In finding thee are all things round us found;
  In losing thee are all things lost beside;
  Ears have we, but in vain strange voices sound;
  And to our eyes the vision is denied.
  We wander in the country far remote,
  Mid tombs and ruined piles in death to dwell;
  Or on the records of past greatness dote,
  And for a buried soul the living sell;
  While on our path bewildered falls the night
  That ne'er returns us to the fields of light.

JONES VERY.


       *       *       *       *       *

HEAVEN.


  Beyond these chilling winds and gloomy skies,
    Beyond death's cloudy portal,
  There is a land where beauty never dies,
    Where love becomes immortal;

  A land whose life is never dimmed by shade,
    Whose fields are ever vernal;
  Where nothing beautiful can ever fade,
    But blooms for aye eternal.

  We may know how sweet its balmy air,
    How bright and fair its flowers;
  We may not hear the songs that echo there,
    Through those enchanted bowers.

  The city's shining towers we may not see
    With our dim earthly vision,
  For Death, the silent warder, keeps the key
    That opes the gates elysian.

  But sometimes, when adown the western sky
    A fiery sunset lingers,
  Its golden gates swing inward noiselessly,
    Unlocked by unseen fingers.

  And while they stand a moment half ajar,
    Gleams from the inner glory
  Stream brightly through the azure vault afar,
    And half reveal the story.

  O land unknown! O land of love divine!
    Father, all-wise, eternal!
  O, guide these wandering, wayworn feet of mine
    Into those pastures vernal!

NANCY AMELIA WOODBURY PRIEST.


       *       *       *       *       *

TELL ME, YE WINGÈD WINDS.


    Tell me, ye wingèd winds,
      That round my pathway roar,
    Do ye not know some spot
      Where mortals weep no more?
    Some lone and pleasant dell,
      Some valley in the west,
    Where, free from toil and pain,
      The weary soul may rest?
  The loud wind dwindled to a whisper low,
  And sighed for pity as it answered,--"No."

    Tell me, thou mighty deep.
      Whose billows round me play,
    Know'st thou some favored spot,
      Some island far away,
    Where weary man may find
      The bliss for which he sighs,--
    Where sorrow never lives,
      And friendship never dies?
  The loud waves, rolling in perpetual flow,
  Stopped for awhile, and sighed to answer,--"No."

    And thou, serenest moon,
      That, with such lovely face,
    Dost look upon the earth,
      Asleep in night's embrace;
    Tell me, in all thy round
      Hast thou not seen some spot
    Where miserable man
      May find a happier lot?
  Behind a cloud the moon withdrew in woe,
  And a voice, sweet but sad, responded,--"No."

    Tell me, my secret soul,
      O, tell me, Hope and Faith,
    Is there no resting-place
      From sorrow, sin, and death?
    Is there no happy spot
      Where mortals may be blest,
    Where grief may find a balm,
      And weariness a rest?
  Faith, Hope, and Love, best boons to mortals given,
  Waved their bright wings, and whispered,--"Yes, in heaven!"

CHARLES MACKAY.


       *       *       *       *       *

HEAVEN.


  There is a land of pure delight,
    Where saints immortal reign;
  Infinite day excludes the night,
    And pleasures banish pain.

  There everlasting spring abides,
    And never-withering flowers;
  Death, like a narrow sea, divides
    This heavenly land from ours.

  Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood
    Stand dressed in living green;
  So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
    While Jordan rolled between.

  But timorous mortals start and shrink
    To cross this narrow sea,
  And linger shivering on the brink,
    And fear to launch away.

  Oh! could we make our doubts remove,
    Those gloomy doubts that rise,
  And see the Canaan that we love
    With unbeclouded eyes--

  Could we but climb where Moses stood,
    And view the landscape o'er,
  Not Jordan's stream, nor death's cold flood
    Should fright us from the shore.

ISAAC WATTS.


       *       *       *       *       *

PEACE.


  My soul, there is a country
    Afar beyond the stars,
  Where stands a wingèd sentry,
    All skilful in the wars.

  There, above noise and danger,
    Sweet peace sits crowned with smiles,
  And One born in a manger
    Commands the beauteous files.

  He is thy gracious friend,
    And (O my soul awake!)
  Did in pure love descend,
    To die here for thy sake.

  If thou canst get but thither,
    There grows the flower of peace--
  The rose that cannot wither--
    Thy fortress, and thy ease.

  Leave, then, thy foolish ranges;
    For none can thee secure,
  But one who never changes--
    Thy God, thy life, thy cure.

HENRY VAUGHAN.


       *       *       *       *       *

STAR-MIST.

    FROM "STARS."


  More and more stars! behold yon hazy arch
    Spanning the vault on high,
  By planets traversed in majestic march,
    Seeming to earth's dull eye
  A breath of gleaming air: but take thou wing
    Of Faith and upward spring:--
  Into a thousand stars the misty light
  Will part; each star a world with its own day and night.

  Not otherwise of yonder Saintly host
    Upon the glorious shore
  Deem thou. He marks them all, not one is lost;
    By name He counts them o'er.
  Full many a soul, to man's dim praise unknown,
    May on its glory throne
  As brightly shine, and prove as strong in prayer
  As theirs, whose separate beams shoot keenest thro' this air.

JOHN KEBLE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS.

    FROM "THE FAËRIE QUEENE," BOOK II. CANTO 8.


  And is there care in heaven? And is there love
    In heavenly spirits to these creatures base,
    That may compassion of their evils move?
    There is:--else much more wretched were the case
    Of men than beasts: but O the exceeding grace
    Of Highest God! that loves his creatures so,
    And all his workes with mercy doth embrace,
    That blessèd angels he sends to and fro,
  To serve to wicked man, to serve his wicked foe!

  How oft do they their silver bowers leave,
    To come to succour us that succour want!
    How oft do they with golden pinions cleave
    The flitting skyes, like flying pursuivant,
    Against fowle feendes to ayd us militant!
    They for us fight, they watch, and dewly ward,
    And their bright squadrons round about us plant;
    And all for love, and nothing for reward;
  O, why should heavenly God to men have such regard!

EDMUND SPENSER.


       *       *       *       *       *

SAINT AGNES.


  Deep on the convent-roof the snows
    Are sparkling to the moon:
  My breath to heaven like vapor goes:
    May my soul follow soon!
  The shadows of the convent-towers
    Slant down the snowy sward,
  Still creeping with the creeping hours
    That lead me to my Lord:
  Make Thou my spirit pure and clear
    As are the frosty skies,
  Or this first snow-drop of the year
    That in my bosom lies.

  As these white robes are soiled and dark,
    To yonder shining ground;
  As this pale taper's earthly spark,
    To yonder argent round;
  So shows my soul before the Lamb,
    My spirit before Thee;
  So in mine earthly house I am,
    To that I hope to be.
  Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far,
    Through all yon starlight keen,
  Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star,
    In raiment white and clean.

  He lifts me to the golden doors;
    The flashes come and go;
  All heaven bursts her starry floors,
    And strows her lights below,
  And deepens on and up! the gates
    Roll backhand far within
  For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits,
    To make me pure of sin.
  The sabbath of Eternity,
    One sabbath deep and wide--
  A light upon the shining sea--
    The Bridegroom with his bride!

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.


       *       *       *       *       *

PRAISE OF THE CELESTIAL COUNTRY.

    [The poem _De Contemptu Mundi_ was written by Bernard de
    Morlaix, Monk of Cluni. The translation following is of a
    portion of the poem distinguished by the sub-title "Laus
    Patriae Coelestis."]


  The world is very evil,
    The times are waxing late;
  Be sober and keep vigil,
    The Judge is at the gate,--
  The Judge that comes in mercy,
    The Judge that comes with might,
  To terminate the evil,
    To diadem the right.
  When the just and gentle Monarch
    Shall summon from the tomb,
  Let man, the guilty, tremble,
    For Man, the God, shall doom!

  Arise, arise, good Christian,
    Let right to wrong succeed;
  Let penitential sorrow
    To heavenly gladness lead,--
  To the light that hath no evening,
    That knows nor moon nor sun,
  The light so new and golden,
    The light that is but one.

  And when the Sole-Begotten
    Shall render up once more
  The kingdom to the Father,
    Whose own it was before,
  Then glory yet unheard of
    Shall shed abroad its ray,
  Resolving all enigmas,
    An endless Sabbath-day.

  For thee, O dear, dear Country!
    Mine eyes their vigils keep;
  For very love, beholding
    Thy happy name, they weep.
  The mention of thy glory
    Is unction to the breast,
  And medicine in sickness,
    And love, and life, and rest.

  O one, O only Mansion!
    O Paradise of Joy,
  Where tears are ever banished,
    And smiles have no alloy!
  Beside thy living waters
    All plants are, great and small,
  The cedar of the forest,
    The hyssop of the wall;
  With jaspers glow thy bulwarks,
    Thy streets with emeralds blaze,
  The sardius and the topaz
    Unite in thee their rays;
  Thine ageless walls are bonded
    With amethyst unpriced;
  Thy Saints build up its fabric,
    And the corner-stone is Christ.

  The Cross is all thy splendor,
    The Crucified thy praise;
  His laud and benediction
    Thy ransomed people raise:
  "Jesus, the gem of Beauty,
    True God and Man," they sing,
  "The never-failing Garden,
    The ever-golden Ring;
  The Door, the Pledge, the Husband,
    The Guardian of his Court;
  The Day-star of Salvation,
    The Porter and the Port!"

  Thou hast no shore, fair ocean!
    Thou hast no time, bright day!
  Dear fountain of refreshment
    To pilgrims far away!
  Upon the Rock of Ages
    They raise thy holy tower;
  Thine is the victor's laurel,
    And thine the golden dower!

  Thou feel'st in mystic rapture,
    O Bride that know'st no guile,
  The Prince's sweetest kisses,
    The Prince's loveliest smile;
  Unfading lilies, bracelets
    Of living pearl thine own;
  The Lamb is ever near thee,
    The Bridegroom thine alone.
  The Crown is he to guerdon,
    The Buckler to protect,
  And he himself the Mansion,
    And he the Architect.

  The only art thou needest--
    Thanksgiving for thy lot;
  The only joy thou seekest--
    The Life where Death is not.
  And all thine endless leisure,
    In sweetest accents, sings
  The ill that was thy merit,
    The wealth that is thy King's!

  Jerusalem the golden,
    With milk and honey blest,
  Beneath thy contemplation
    Sink heart and voice oppressed.
  I know not, O I know not,
    What social joys are there!
  What radiancy of glory,
    What light beyond compare!

  And when I fain would sing them,
    My spirit fails and faints;
  And vainly would it image
    The assembly of the Saints.

  They stand, those halls of Zion,
    Conjubilant with song,
  And bright with many an angel,
    And all the martyr throng;
  The Prince is ever in them,
    The daylight is serene;
  The pastures of the Blessèd
    Are decked in glorious sheen.

  There is the Throne of David,
    And there, from care released,
  The song of them that triumph,
    The shout of them that feast;
  And they who, with their Leader,
    Have conquered in the fight,
  Forever and forever
    Are clad in robes of white!

  O holy, placid harp-notes
    Of that eternal hymn!
  O sacred, sweet reflection,
    And peace of Seraphim!
  O thirst, forever ardent,
    Yet evermore content!
  O true peculiar vision
    Of God cunctipotent!
  Ye know the many mansions
    For many a glorious name,
  And divers retributions
    That divers merits claim;
  For midst the constellations
    That deck our earthly sky,
  This star than that is brighter--
    And so it is on high.

  Jerusalem the glorious!
    The glory of the Elect!
  O dear and future vision
    That eager hearts expect!
  Even now by faith I see thee,
    Even here thy walls discern;
  To thee my thoughts are kindled,
    And strive, and pant, and yearn.

  Jerusalem the only,
    That look'st from heaven below,
  In thee is all my glory,
    In me is all my woe;
  And though my body may not,
    My spirit seeks thee fain,
  Till flesh and earth return me
    To earth and flesh again.

  O none can tell thy bulwarks,
    How gloriously they rise!
  O none can tell thy capitals
    Of beautiful device!
  Thy loveliness oppresses
    All human thought and heart;
  And none, O peace, O Zion,
    Can sing thee as thou art!

  New mansion of new people,
    Whom God's own love and light
  Promote, increase, make holy,
    Identify, unite!
  Thou City of the Angels!
    Thou City of the Lord!
  Whose everlasting music
    Is the glorious decachord!

  And there the band of Prophets
    United praise ascribes,
  And there the twelvefold chorus
    Of Israel's ransomed tribes.
  The lily-beds of virgins,
    The roses' martyr-glow,
  The cohort of the Fathers
    Who kept the faith below.

  And there the Sole-Begotten
    Is Lord in regal state,--
  He, Judah's mystic Lion,
    He, Lamb Immaculate.
  O fields that know no sorrow!
    O state that fears no strife!
  O princely bowers! O land of flowers!
    O realm and home of Life!

  Jerusalem, exulting
    On that securest shore,
  I hope thee, wish thee, sing thee,
    And love thee evermore!
  I ask not for my merit,
    I seek not to deny
  My merit is destruction,
    A child of wrath am I;
  But yet with faith I venture
    And hope upon my way;
  For those perennial guerdons
    I labor night and day.

  The best and dearest Father,
    Who made me and who saved,
  Bore with me in defilement,
    And from defilement laved,
  When in his strength I struggle,
    For very joy I leap,
  When in my sin I totter,
    I weep, or try to weep:
  Then grace, sweet grace celestial,
    Shall all its love display,
  And David's Royal Fountain
    Purge every sin away.

  O mine, my golden Zion!
    O lovelier far than gold,
  With laurel-girt battalions,
    And safe victorious fold!
  O sweet and blessèd Country,
    Shall I ever see thy face?
  O sweet and blessèd Country,
    Shall I ever win thy grace?
  I have the hope within me
    To comfort and to bless!
  Shall I ever win the prize itself?
    O tell me, tell me, Yes!

  Exult! O dust and ashes!
    The Lord shall be thy part;
  His only, his forever,
    Thou shalt be, and thou art!
  Exult, O dust and ashes!
    The Lord shall be thy part;
  His only, his forever,
    Thou shalt be, and thou art!

From the Latin of BERNARD DE MORLAIX.

Translation of JOHN MASON NEALE.


       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW JERUSALEM;

    OR, THE SOUL'S BREATHING AFTER THE HEAVENLY COUNTRY.

    "Since Christ's fair truth needs no man's art,
    Take this rude song in better part."


  O mother dear, Jerusalem,
    When shall I come to thee?
  When shall my sorrows have an end--
    Thy joys when shall I see?
  O happy harbor of God's saints!
    O sweet and pleasant soil!
  In thee no sorrows can be found--
    No grief, no care, no toil.

  In thee no sickness is at all,
    No hurt, nor any sore;
  There is no death nor ugly night,
    But life for evermore.
  No dimming cloud o'ershadows thee,
    No cloud nor darksome night,
  But every soul shines as the sun--
    For God himself gives light.

  There lust and lucre cannot dwell,
    There envy bears no sway;
  There is no hunger, thirst, nor heat.
    But pleasures every way.
  Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
    Would God I were in thee!
  Oh! that my sorrows had an end,
    Thy joys that I might see!

  No pains, no pangs, no grieving griefs,
    No woful night is there;
  No sigh, no sob, no cry is heard--
    No well-away, no fear.
  Jerusalem the city is
    Of God our king alone;
  The Lamb of God, the light thereof,
    Sits there upon His throne.

  O God! that I Jerusalem
    With speed may go behold!
  For why? the pleasures there abound
    Which here cannot be told.
  Thy turrets and thy pinnacles
    With carbuncles do shine--
  With jasper, pearl, and chrysolite,
    Surpassing pure and fine.

  Thy houses are of ivory,
    Thy windows crystal clear,
  Thy streets are laid with beaten gold--
    There angels do appear.
  Thy walls are made of precious stone,
    Thy bulwarks diamond square,
  Thy gates are made of orient pearl--
    O God! if I were there!

  Within thy gates no thing can come
    That is not passing clean;
  No spider's web, no dirt, nor dust,
    No filth may there be seen.
  Jehovah, Lord, now come away,
    And end my griefs and plaints--
  Take me to Thy Jerusalem,
    And place me with Thy saints!

  Who there are crowned with glory great,
    And see God face to face,
  They triumph still, and aye rejoice--
    Most happy is their case.
  But we that are in banishment,
    Continually do moan;
  We sigh, we mourn, we sob, we weep--
    Perpetually we groan.

  Our sweetness mixèd is with gall,
    Our pleasures are but pain,
  Our joys not worth the looking on--
    Our sorrows aye remain.
  But there they live in such delight,
    Such pleasure and such play,
  That unto them a thousand years
    Seems but as yesterday.

  O my sweet home, Jerusalem!
    Thy joys when shall I see--
  The King sitting upon His throne,
    And thy felicity?
  Thy vineyards, and thy orchards,
    So wonderfully rare,
  Are furnished with all kinds of fruit,
    Most beautifully fair.

  Thy gardens and thy goodly walks
    Continually are green;
  There grow such sweet and pleasant flowers
    As nowhere else are seen.
  There cinnamon and sugar grow,
    There nard and balm abound;
  No tongue can tell, no heart can think,
    The pleasures there are found.

  There nectar and ambrosia spring--
    There music's ever sweet;
  There many a fair and dainty thing
    Are trod down under feet.
  Quite through the streets, with pleasant sound,
    The flood of life doth flow;
  Upon the banks, on every side,
    The trees of life do grow.

  These trees each month yield ripened fruit--
    For evermore they spring;
  And all the nations of the world
    To thee their honors bring.
  Jerusalem, God's dwelling-place,
    Full sore I long to see;
  Oh! that my sorrows had an end,
    That I might dwell in thee!

  There David stands, with harp in hand,
    As master of the choir;
  A thousand times that man were blest
    That might his music hear.
  There Mary sings "Magnificat,"
    With tunes surpassing sweet;
  And all the virgins bear their part,
    Singing around her feet.

  "Te Deum," doth Saint Ambrose sing,
    Saint Austin doth the like;
  Old Simeon and Zacharie
    Have not their songs to seek.
  There Magdalene hath left her moan,
    And cheerfully doth sing,
  With all blest saints whose harmony
    Through every street doth ring.

  Jerusalem! Jerusalem!
    Thy joys fain would I see;
  Come quickly, Lord, and end my grief,
    And take me home to Thee;
  Oh! paint Thy name on my forehead,
    And take me hence away,
  That I may dwell with Thee in bliss,
    And sing Thy praises aye.

  Jerusalem, the happy home--
    Jehovah's throne on high!
  O sacred city, queen, and wife
    Of Christ eternally!
  O comely queen with glory clad,
    With honor and degree,
  All fair thou art, exceeding bright--
    No spot there is in thee!

  I long to see Jerusalem,
    The comfort of us all;
  For thou art fair and beautiful--
    None ill can thee befall.
  In thee, Jerusalem, I say,
    No darkness dare appear--
  No night, no shade, no winter foul--
    No time doth alter there.

  No candle needs, no moon to shine,
    No glittering star to light;
  For Christ, the king of righteousness,
    For ever shineth bright.
  A lamb unspotted, white and pure,
    To thee doth stand in lieu
  Of light--so great the glory is
    Thine heavenly king to view.

  He is the King of kings beset
    In midst His servants' sight:
  And they, His happy household all,
    Do serve Him day and night.
  There, there the choir of angels sing--
    There the supernal sort
  Of citizens, which hence are rid
    From dangers deep, do sport.

  There be the prudent prophets all,
    The apostles six and six,
  The glorious martyrs in a row,
    And confessors betwixt.
  There doth the crew of righteous men
    And matrons all consist--
  Young men and maids that here on earth
    Their pleasures did resist.

  The sheep and lambs, that hardly 'scaped
    The snare of death and hell,
  Triumph in joy eternally,
    Whereof no tongue can tell;
  And though the glory of each one
    Doth differ in degree,
  Yet is the joy of all alike
    And common, as we see.

  There love and charity do reign,
    And Christ is all in all,
  Whom they most perfectly behold
    In joy celestial.
  They love, they praise--they praise, they love;
    They "Holy, holy," cry;
  They neither toil, nor faint, nor end,
    But laud continually.

  Oh! happy thousand times were I,
    If, after wretched days,
  I might with listening ears conceive
    Those heavenly songs of praise,
  Which to the eternal king are sung
    By happy wights above--
  By savèd souls and angels sweet,
    Who love the God of love.

  Oh! passing happy were my state,
    Might I be worthy found
  To wait upon my God and king,
    His praises there to sound;
  And to enjoy my Christ above,
    His favor and His grace,
  According to His promise made,
    Which here I interlace:

  "O Father dear," quoth He, "let them
    Which Thou hast put of old
  To me, be there where lo! I am--
    Thy glory to behold;
  Which I with Thee, before the world
    Was made in perfect wise,
  Have had--from whence the fountain great
    Of glory doth arise."

  Again: "If any man will serve
    Thee, let him follow me;
  For where I am, he there, right sure,
    Then shall my servant be."
  And still: "If any man loves me,
    Him loves my Father dear,
  Whom I do love--to him myself
    In glory will appear."

  Lord, take away my misery,
    That then I may be bold
  With Thee, in Thy Jerusalem,
    Thy glory to behold;
  And so in Zion see my king,
    My love, my Lord, my all--
  Where now as in a glass I see,
    There face to face I shall.

  Oh! blessèd are the pure in heart--
    Their sovereign they shall see;
  O ye most happy, heavenly wights,
    Which of God's household be!
  O Lord, with speed dissolve my bands,
    These gins and fetters strong;
  For I have dwelt within the tents
    Of Kedar over long.

  Yet search me, Lord, and find me out!
    Fetch me Thy fold unto,
  That all Thy angels may rejoice,
    While all Thy will I do.
  O mother dear! Jerusalem!
    When shall I come to thee?
  When shall my sorrows have an end,
    Thy joys when shall I see?

  Yet once again I pray Thee, Lord,
    To quit me from all strife,
  That to Thy hill I may attain,
    And dwell there all my life--
  With cherubim and seraphim
    And holy souls of men,
  To sing Thy praise, O God of hosts!
    Forever and amen!

ANONYMOUS.


       *       *       *       *       *

PARADISE.


  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    Who doth not crave for rest,
  Who would not seek the happy land
    Where they that loved are blest?
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    The world is growing old;
  Who would not be at rest and free
    Where love is never cold?
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    Wherefore doth death delay?--
  Bright death, that is the welcome dawn
    Of our eternal day;
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    'Tis weary waiting here;
  I long to be where Jesus is,
    To feel, to see him near;
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    I want to sin no more,
  I want to be as pure on earth
    As on thy spotless shore;
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    I greatly long to see
  The special place my dearest Lord
    Is destining for me;
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

  O Paradise, O Paradise,
    I feel 'twill not be long;
  Patience! I almost think I hear
    Faint fragments of thy song;
      Where loyal hearts and true
        Stand ever in the light,
      All rapture through and through,
        In God's most holy sight.

FREDERICK WILLIAM FABER.




FROM "THE DIVINE COMEDY."

       *       *       *       *       *

HELL.

    INSCRIPTION OVER THE GATE.

    CANTO III.


  "Through me you pass into the city of woe:
  Through me you pass into eternal pain:
  Through me among the people lost for aye.
  Justice the founder of my fabric moved:
  To rear me was the task of power divine,
  Supremest wisdom, and primeval love.
  Before me things create were none, save things
  Eternal, and eternal I endure.
  All hope abandon, ye who enter here."


       *       *       *       *       *

PURGATORY.

    PRAYER.

    CANTO VI.


                            When I was freed
  From all those spirits, who prayed for others' prayers
  To hasten on their state of blessedness;
  Straight I began: "O thou, my luminary!
  It seems expressly in thy text denied,
  That Heaven's supreme decree can ever bend
  To supplication; yet with this design
  Do these entreat. Can then their hope be vain?
  Or is thy saying not to be revealed?"
  He thus to me: "Both what I write is plain,
  And these deceived not in their hope; if well
  Thy mind consider, that the sacred height
  Of judgment doth not stoop, because love's flame
  In a short moment all fulfils, which he,
  Who sojourns here, in right should satisfy.
  Besides, when I this point concluded thus,
  By praying no defect could be supplied:
  Because the prayer had none access to God.
  Yet in this deep suspicion rest thou not
  Contented, unless she assure thee so,
  Who betwixt truth and mind infuses light:
  I know not if thou take me right; I mean
  Beatrice. Her thou shalt behold above,
  Upon this mountain's crown, fair seat of joy."

       *       *       *       *       *

    PRAYER OF PENITENTS.

    CANTO XI.

  "O thou Almighty Father! who dost make
  The heavens thy dwelling, not in bounds confined,
  But that, with love intenser, there thou view'st
  Thy primal effluence; hallowed be thy name:
  Join, each created being, to extol
  Thy might; for worthy humblest thanks and praise
  Is thy blest Spirit. May thy kingdom's peace
  Come unto us; for we, unless it come,
  With all our striving, thither tend in vain.
  As, of their will, the angels unto thee
  Tender meet sacrifice, circling thy throne
  With loud hosannas; so of theirs be done
  By saintly men on earth. Grant us, this day,
  Our daily manna, without which he roams
  Through this rough desert retrograde, who most
  Toils to advance his steps. As we to each
  Pardon the evil done us, pardon thou
  Benign, and of our merit take no count.
  'Gainst the old adversary, prove thou not
  Our virtue, easily subdued; but free
  From his incitements, and defeat his wiles.
  This last petition, dearest Lord! is made
  Not for ourselves; since that were needless now;
  But for their sakes who after us remain."

       *       *       *       *       *

    MAN'S FREE-WILL.

    CANTO XVI.

                                   "Ye, who live,
  Do so each cause refer to heaven above,
  E'en as its motion, of necessity,
  Drew with it all that moves. If this were so,
  Free choice in you were none; nor justice would
  There should be joy for virtue, woe for ill.
  Your movements have their primal bent from heaven;
  Not all: yet said I all; what then ensues?
  Light have ye still to follow evil or good,
  And of the will free power, which, if it stand
  Firm and unwearied in Heaven's first assay,
  Conquers at last, so it be cherished well,
  Triumphant over all. To mightier force,
  To better nature subject, ye abide
  Free, not constrained by that which forms in you
  The reasoning mind uninfluenced of the stars.
  If then the present race of mankind err,
  Seek in yourselves the cause, and find it there."

       *       *       *       *       *

    FIRE OF PURIFICATION.

    CANTO XXVII.

  Now was the sun so stationed, as when first
  His early radiance quivers on the heights,
  Where streamed his Maker's blood; while Libra hangs
  Above Hesperian Ebro; and new fires,
  Meridian, flash on Ganges' yellow tide.
    So day was sinking, when the angel of God
  Appeared before us. Joy was in his mien.
  Forth of the flame he stood upon the brink;
  And with a voice, whose lively clearness far
  Surpassed our human, "Blessed are the pure
  In heart," he sang: then near him as we came,
  "Go ye not further, holy spirits!" he cried,
  "Ere the fire pierce you: enter in; and list
  Attentive to the song ye hear from thence."
  I, when I heard his saying, was as one
  Laid in the grave. My hands together clasped,
  And upward stretching, on the fire I looked;
  And busy fancy conjured up the forms
  Erewhile beheld alive consumed in flames.
    The escorting spirits turned with gentle looks
  Toward me; and the Mantuan spake: "My son,
  Here torment thou may'st feel, but canst not death.
  Remember thee, remember thee, if I
  Safe e'en on Geryon brought thee; now I come
  More near to God, wilt thou not trust me now?
  Of this be sure; though in its womb that flame
  A thousand years contained thee, from thy head
  No hair should perish. If thou doubt my truth,
  Approach; and with thy hands thy vesture's hem
  Stretch forth, and for thyself confirm belief.
  Lay now all fear, oh! lay all fear aside.
  Turn hither, and come onward undismayed."
    I still, though conscience urged, no step advanced.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Into the fire before me then he walked:
  And Statius, who erewhile no little space
  Had parted us, he prayed to come behind.
    I would have cast me into molten glass
  To cool me, when I entered; so intense
  Raged the conflagrant mass. The sire beloved,
  To comfort me, as he proceeded, still
  Of Beatrice talked. "Her eyes," saith he,
  "E'en now I seem to view." From the other side
  A voice, that sang, did guide us; and the voice
  Following, with heedful ear, we issued forth,
  There where the path led upward. "Come," we heard,
  "Come, blessèd of my Father." Such the sounds,
  That hailed us from within a light, which shone
  So radiant, I could not endure the view.
  "The sun," it added, "hastes: and evening comes.
  Delay not: ere the western sky is hung
  With blackness, strive ye for the pass." Our way
  Upright within the rock arose, and faced
  Such part of heaven, that from before my steps
  The beams were shrouded of the sinking sun.


       *       *       *       *       *

PARADISE.

    SIN AND REDEMPTION.

    CANTO VII.

                               What I have heard,
  Is plain, thou say'st: but wherefore God this way
  For our redemption chose, eludes my search.
    "Brother! no eye of man not perfected,
  Nor fully ripened in the flame of love,
  May fathom this decree. It is a mark,
  In sooth, much aimed at, and but little kenned:
  And I will therefore show thee why such way
  Was worthiest. The celestial love, that spurns
  All envying in its bounty, in itself
  With such effulgence blazeth, as sends forth
  All beauteous things eternal. What distils
  Immediate thence, no end of being knows;
  Bearing its seal immutably imprest.
  Whatever thence immediate falls, is free,
  Free wholly, uncontrollable by power
  Of each thing new: by such conformity
  More grateful to its author, whose bright beams,
  Though all partake their shining, yet in those
  Are liveliest, which resemble him the most.
  These tokens of pre-eminence on man
  Largely bestowed, if any of them fail,
  He needs must forfeit his nobility,
  No longer stainless. Sin alone is that,
  Which doth disfranchise him, and make unlike
  To the chief good; for that its light in him
  Is darkened. And to dignity thus lost
  Is no return; unless, where guilt makes void,
  He for ill pleasure pay with equal pain.
  Your nature, which entirely in its seed
  Transgressed, from these distinctions fell, no less
  Than from its state in Paradise; nor means
  Found on recovery (search all methods out
  As strictly as thou may) save one of these,
  The only fords were left through which to wade:
  Either, that God had of his courtesy
  Released him merely; or else, man himself
  For his own folly by himself atoned.
    "Fix now thine eye, intently as thou canst,
  On the everlasting counsel; and explore,
  Instructed by my words, the dread abyss.
    "Man in himself had ever lacked the means
  Of satisfaction, for he could not stoop
  Obeying, in humility so low,
  As high, he, disobeying, thought to soar:
  And, for this reason, he had vainly tried,
  Out of his own sufficiency, to pay
  The rigid satisfaction. Then behoved
  That God should by his own ways lead him back
  Unto the life, from whence he fell, restored:
  By both his ways, I mean, or one alone.
  But since the deed is ever prized the more.
  The more the doer's good intent appears;
  Goodness celestial, whose broad signature
  Is on the universe, of all its ways
  To raise ye up, was fain to leave out none.
  Nor aught so vast or so magnificent,
  Either for him who gave or who received,
  Between the last night and the primal day,
  Was or can be. For God more bounty showed,
  Giving himself to make man capable
  Of his return to life, than had the terms
  Been mere and unconditional release.
  And for his justice, every method else
  Were all too scant, had not the Son of God
  Humbled himself to put on mortal flesh."

       *       *       *       *       *

    THE TRIUMPH OF CHRIST.

    CANTO XIV.

    And lo! forthwith there rose up round about
  A lustre, over that already there;
  Of equal clearness, like the brightening up
  Of the horizon. As at evening hour
  Of twilight, new appearances through heaven
  Peer with faint glimmer, doubtfully descried;
  So, there, new substances methought, began
  To rise in view beyond the other twain,
  And wheeling, sweep their ampler circuit wide.
    O genuine glitter of eternal Beam!
  With what a sudden whiteness did it flow,
  O'erpowering vision in me. But so fair,
  So passing lovely, Beatrice showed,
  Mind cannot follow it, nor words express
  Her infinite sweetness. Thence mine eyes regained
  Power to look up; and I beheld myself,
  Sole with my lady, to more lofty bliss
  Translated: for the star, with warmer smile
  Impurpled, well denoted our ascent.
    With all the heart, and with that tongue which speaks
  The same in all, an holocaust I made
  To God befitting the new grace vouchsafed.
  And from my bosom had not yet upsteamed
  The fuming of that incense, when I knew
  The rite accepted. With such mighty sheen
  And mantling crimson, in two listed rays
  The splendors shot before me, that I cried,
  "God of Sabaoth! that dost prank them thus!"
    As leads the galaxy from pole to pole,
  Distinguished into greater lights and less,
  Its pathway, which the wisest fail to spell;
  So thickly studded, in the depth of Mars,
  Those rays described the venerable sign,
  That quadrants in the round conjoining frame.
    Here memory mocks the toil of genius. Christ
  Beamed on that cross; and pattern fails me now.
  But whoso takes his cross, and follows Christ,
  Will pardon me for that I leave untold,
  When in the fleckered dawning he shall spy
  The glitterance of Christ. From horn to horn,
  And 'tween the summit and the base, did move
  Lights, scintillating, as they met and passed.
  Thus oft are seen with ever-changeful glance,
  Straight or athwart, now rapid and now slow,
  The atomies of bodies, long or short,
  To move along the sunbeam, whose slant line
  Checkers the shadow interposed by art
  Against the noontide heat. And as the chime
  Of minstrel music, dulcimer, and harp
  With many strings, a pleasant dinning makes
  To him, who heareth not distinct the note;
  So from the lights, which there appeared to me,
  Gathered along the cross a melody,
  That, indistinctly heard, with ravishment
  Possessed me. Yet I marked it was a hymn
  Of lofty praises; for there came to me
  "Arise," and "Conquer," as to one who hears
  And comprehends not. Me such ecstasy
  O'ercame, that never, till that hour, was thing
  That held me in so sweet imprisonment.

       *       *       *       *       *

    THE SAINTS IN GLORY.

    CANTO XXXI.

  In fashion, as a snow-white rose, lay then
  Before my view the saintly multitude,
  Which is his own blood Christ espoused. Meanwhile,
  That other host, that soar aloft to gaze
  And celebrate his glory, whom they love,
  Hovered around; and, like a troop of bees,
  Amid the vernal sweets alighting now,
  Now, clustering, where their fragrant labor glows,
  Flew downward to the mighty flower, or rose
  From the redundant petals, streaming back
  Unto the steadfast dwelling of their joy.
  Faces had they of flame, and wings of gold:
  The rest was whiter than the driven snow;
  And, as they flitted down into the flower,
  From range to range, fanning their plumy loins,
  Whispered the peace and ardor, which they won
  From that soft winnowing. Shadow none, the vast
  Interposition of such numerous flight
  Cast, from above, upon the flower, or view
  Obstructed aught. For, through the universe,
  Wherever merited, celestial light
  Glides freely, and no obstacle prevents.
    All there, who reign in safety and in bliss,
  Ages long past or new, on one sole mark
  Their love and vision fixed. O trinal beam
  Of individual star, that charm'st them thus!
  Vouchsafe one glance to gild our storm below.
    If the grim brood, from Arctic shores that roamed
  (Where Helice forever, as she wheels,
  Sparkles a mother's fondness on her son),
  Stood in mute wonder mid the works of Rome,
  When to their view the Lateran arose
  In greatness more than earthly; I, who then
  From human to divine had passed, from time
  Unto eternity, and out of Florence
  To justice and to truth, how might I chuse
  But marvel too? 'Twixt gladness and amaze,
  In sooth, no will had I to utter aught,
  Or hear. And, as a pilgrim, when he rests
  Within the temple of his vow, looks round
  In breathless awe, and hopes some time to tell
  Of all its goodly state; e'en so mine eyes
  Coursed up and down along the living light,
  Now low, and now aloft, and now around,
  Visiting every step. Looks I beheld,
  Where charity in soft persuasion sat;
  Smiles from within, and radiance from above;
  And, in each gesture, grace and honor high.
    So roved my ken, and in its general form
  All Paradise surveyed.

DANTE.

Translation of HENRY FRANCIS CARY.

county fair second place ribbon in an empty stall
junk car  the hum of bees beneath the hood
the christmas after we told them  artificial tree
a bit of rust on the chevy's fender harvest moon
a lightning strike gives up a flower
forest clearing a scapula left for the moon
that time of year moonlight fills his empty chair
birding . . . the unfamiliar path home
winter solstice the tilt  of her hospital bed
first morning firecracker papers  wander the streets
flies wait it out under a cows chin spring shower
heartwood the saw changes its tune
snow field  the earth marked  by fallen angels
setting sun an accordion squeezes the night air
no moon the click of stilettos  on cobblestones
flowing estuary native languages  long gone
in the hot tub  my eyes on her floating breasts hunters moon
rosebud unfolding the seed packet left behind in revelations
no escaping this moonlight  pompeii
river mud the shape of boys
somewhere becoming rain becoming somewhere
desert twilight a map with many creases nailed to a cross
we huddle over mothers open grave lawless winter
a long bus ride the prophetic language  of the stops
navajo moon the coyote call not a coyote
deleting words  from the eulogy falling leaves
mark smith
calla lily  the soundof a ladder  lengthening
tasting the well  in the water  summer stars
mothers day the expiration date on wildflower seeds
northern lights . . . the scratchy play of seventy-eights
a recurring escape from my fathers dream
the big dipper  no matter where i stand mountain sky
summer passing  the yard flamingos  rusty legs
glint of sunlight:  the respirator carries on alone
all souls day...  my name called  from the front gate
autumn  an empty booster seat in the barber's window
hunter's cabin: of the woods  not of it
end of the walk returning the crow's feather  where i found it
cafe for sale outdoor tables rusting  into autumn
day lilies  another death date added  to the family tree
the house finch has a song for it,  morning after snow
crescent moon a bone carver sings to his ancestor
close enough to touch i let the junco lead me away from its nest
blowing leaves  tempt the old cat,  but not enough
ancient mountains . . . runners clearing hurdles  on the practice field
thanksgiving  fifteen minutes of mince pie
blossoms . . .  the babys bare feet pedal the air
butterfly my attention  attention span
one moth  a thousand candles  light the darkness
trails end  my pebble settles the cairn
family reunion  some of the beached kelp  in knots
a jar of pennies  on the lemonade stand evening cool
lightning . . . the scarecrow's coat sleeve caught in mid-wave
summer's end  the hammock turned in on itself
charcoal alley  children flick marbles  into the light
season of lights  the postman leans to the wind
having no thought we've come to see them  dogwoods in bloom
third place: ($50)  c. r. manley    turning tide  placing intact clams  back in the water
mallard pair  he rocks  on her wake
filtering in  with the night air  a skunk's warning
stone in my pocket  the brook cuts deeper into the mountain
a bee chose the rose i meant to pluck . . . empty vase
soba noodles . . .  the new year  slips in
hazy dusk . . . no one bothered to plow the graveyard road
child's wake  the weight  of rain
gunshot the length of the lake
a stick caught  on the lip of the dam winter's end
summer stars . . .  the old violin goes to the highest bidder
winter drags on . . . i squeeze the last drops  from a teabag
distant thunder a titmouse gives one chirp  and falls silent
alzheimer's birthday  each slice of the cake  takes part of her name
march winds a decade has passed by your grave
indian summer a spent salmon  washes ashore
after the funeral whiskers still  in his razor
the page-finders  of my fathers daily missal  losing their colors
first buds of spring  i change the washers setting  to delicate
among the gravestones with names worn away  children play hide n seek
whalebone from a beach near savoonga  winter rain
all saints morning  a path  of trodden leaves
cremated  in her favorite kimono  small green plums
spring rain the gravedigger latches the door  of his backhoe
spring rain the cat's pink nipples
loon calls  my daughter drawing circles near the fire
summer evening  from across the meadow  a call to supper
shivering on the roof i rub my palms together meteor shower
ocean breeze  a strand of seaweed steadies the kite
autumn rose even as i sketch the wind more petals fall
humid july  from the stove the smell  of old fires
the wind of autumn  a homeless man warms himself  hand to mouth
broken easel  the front yard blue with wildflowers
heat waves  the hitchhiker shifts her child to the other hip
land's end  sand in each bite of my apple
indian summer a fish slips through  the gill net
her 18th birthday for the first time she notices  my silences
spring sunshine the climbing ivy  filled with sparrows
meteor shower a gentle wave wets our sandals
mountain hike we drink from the beginning of a great river
spring sun  high in his arms  the newborn is shown
snail to know its heart beats too
lethal injection  unable to shut  the blind dog's eyes
end of summer the shape of his feet in his sneakers
geronimo's grave  someone has left  plastic flowers
new in town the scent of unknown flowers
foghorns . . .  we lower a kayak  into the sound
catalog time  the garden begins without a seed
new butterfly . . . folded wings  lean into the wind
morning overcast  a few seeds still dangle  from the dandelion
break up  i leave behind  her butterfly net
walking home barefoot,  we enter the shadow of the hill
autumn evening . . .  a page of the old book  separates from the spine
funeral procession . . .  snowflakes blowing  into the headlights
autumn evening  my hospital window  becomes a mirror
storm clouds  the cry of a shearwater circles the sky
late into the night we talk of revelations  moon through the pines
the kettle whistles . . . a blur of garden color  on the window
winter beach  a piece of driftwood  charred at one end
riveredge old growth: a towering window of stars
i'm caught in it too  the blossom-loosening wind
over the railroad tracks  the slow motion of a snake
the beetle i righted  flies straight into a cobweb
leaf in my palm its stem extends  my lifeline
about the tree  over my small son's grave tell me
musty smell forgotten . . . deep  into the text
that venus! leading the cupped moon through every turn of the road
"grabs" and "opens" the fist  sowing seeds
the river coming to it with nothing in my hands
deep silence  the orphaned nestlings  this third morning
summer solstice the long tips of lavender bent by bees
snowbound coloring inside the lines
the dumproad pond tadpoles exit a birdhouse
still sun-warmed . . .  the pulled-out scarecrow  in my arms
changing the swallowtail  changed by it the spring wind
letting the branch go a shower of petals falls  on the old woman
toll booth lit for christmas  from my hand to hers  warm change
winter seclusion  tending all day the small fire
on the path only one of us  touched by a falling leaf
winter, bedtime static flickers through a white sleeve
warm river  up to our necks in sunset
beneath the ice the waterfall still falling
old garden chair  sagging with the weight of a single leaf.
after the stroke. . . watching only the half of your face that smiles
city window mountains and pines etched in frost
autumn deepens  an empty snail shell  explored by an ant
early morning sun scattered on the table  several grains of salt
snowflakes  no one will miss  melt in her hand
bright leaves blow through  her dream house
scattering his ashes  the moon  in bits and pieces
on the river  of many names, one cloud  floating
learning too late he didn't like bubinga wood sun strikes the urn
the war memorial  migrating butterflies cover the names
falling leaves  the house comes out of the wood
leaving you fog on either side  of the white heron
below zero  all curled up in the woodpile the skin of a snake
deep winter.  the armload of firewood chills the kitchen
mourning dove calls . . . my elderly neighbor stills  the sound of her hoeing
august morning  a window washer wiping dust from his sunglasses
snowmelt . . .  she enters  the earth on her knees
an old woolen sweater taken yarn by yarn  from the snowbank
a white horse drinks from the acequia blossoming locust
sunlight shines red through my father's thumb on the steering wheel
two women crying  one giving birth  the other being born
approaching the family plot . . . my furled umbrella  turns into a cane.
chernobyl victim  fingers pressing the plastic  to his wife's caress
cloud shadow  long enough to close  the poppies
the thick clang of a cowbell  the sun deepens
roses in the smaller room more fragrant
ninety winters  spellbound  again
silent cathedral  stained-glass apostles  dimming with dusk
up the path to touch that one oak in last night's dream
dry leaves  the old archer  curves his eyebrow
soft rain the new grave looks old
morning sneeze  the guitar in the corner  resonates
dusk  a lone car going the same way as the river
first days of summer . . .  already the leaves gather beneath the sycamores
fall leaves the trees the winter sky
so many ways  within the waterfall  for water to fall
after the rain  on my vegetable patch a new crop of stones
frozen in mud by the vacant shanty: lottery ticket
the potter's hands  gently shape the vase out of himself
watermelon rind,  sitting in its own juice  the summer sun
figure drawing class  in the model's deepest shadows  a stark white string
ebb tide . . .  a little sea  in the shell
watching rain pouring down . . . pouring down just watching
abandoned store large sign reading  we never close
a single strand of spider silk  stops her
endlessly becoming, clouds
mime  lifting fog
taking time . . . listening to the grocery clerk
in the yukon  sleeping with one eye shut  the summer night
in soap bubbles again and again his face is broken
yard sale,  sunlight filling  mason jars
leaving home . . .  the smell of smoke  from old brick chimneys
frozen pond white antlers rise  through the ice
june night  my mother alone with  her cancer
at dinner biting into the roast beef . . .  the butcher's thumb nail
phoning the neighbors their real voices through the open window
repeating the lecture his eyes following  the window-cleaner's blade
tools rusting unused on the work bench  a faucet dripping
full moon   peering into  the half-built house
dusk  drawing the pond's depth  to the surface
old woman, wrapping her cat's gifts centering the bows
on the way to work  a hot air balloon up in the mist
this heat;  the dog's tail  the only breeze
light up under the gull's wing: sunrise
second husband  painting the fence  the same green
such coolness the snail stretches its neck
the one legged bird that deep bend before taking off
bird song lost  in bird song
walking in on her dead eyes reflecting  snowfall
in the sea  the fireworks rising
bird feeder untouched . . .   alone again
circling each thigh cool  of the night river
small child afraid to throw away  his church bulletin
in utter stillness  the incense changes direction
early spring sun  the spinster combs out her hair for nesting birds
canyon: at the very edge  riversound
out of its slipper  her bare foot talking under the table
burial prayers  grandson playing hide and seek  behind the stones
between the fireflies the changing shape of darkness
my father's hammer  warm again  in my hand
under trees and sky the baby studies  her hands
migrating geese once there was so much  to say
sound of her voice  carrying eggs across the ice
moving  with the clock tower's shadow the flower lady
heart drawn in dust by the old indian . . . rain
whispered dusk  a fox picks its way across the ice
mist  lifting the loon's cry
snowman's eye sinking in  the spring rain
autumn afternoon: i stand on the shadow of the sparrow
ten below zero: man and boy walk through their breath to read old tombstones
hot wind  the roadrunner's beak opens and closes
blackbirds descend  through the floaters  in this eye
the old man closes the shadow in his hand
spring drizzle  rounding the thorn  a drop of light
horizon wild swan drifting through  the woman's body
deserted wharf  the mime bows to the moon
a spider's web  across the windharp the silence
under the back steps  catfish still flop in the pail  the long august night
horns fold  at my shadow's touch; brown slug
early april rain  that woman fills every jar, seals them forever
dead mynah bird . . . with each passing car its wing flaps
picking cotton  the memory  of birdtracks in the snow
old tea bag;  tints the moon  slightly
blackened walnut  left unopened winter solstice
distant woodchopper inside the cabin  axbite echoes
the grey cranes at dusk bending in a line along the crooked fenceposts
checking for water  the woman finds a full moon trapped in the cistern
old woman,  rain in the eye of her needle
the path shorter now, underfoot the crumbling leaves; the child runs ahead
cry of the peacock widens the crack in the adobe wall
fields of snow  not only moonlight  but the moon
cold morning sea  an old man towels himself in the sunlight
fields of corn stretching as far as the eye can see within a lost child
crossing the bright sky of a near-sighted swimmer,  the song of a bird
and yet perishable is flesh a mountain plum
what thing cries out  deep inside us  cooking the turtle?
lights out  . . . the firefly inside
the wind  somewhere else  bird tracks in a light snow
apples cooking: in the aroma  pictures of my mother canning
dawn  another parting with the moon
back and forth goldfish hot & humid afternoon
the child points at the moon  and says, "bird"
one seagull on a shaft of air;  dawn
lean man  carving the tree's dream.
morning-glory folds into herself into her folds
from behind me  the shadow of the ticket-taker  comes down the aisle
walking to work   pages lap at your feet  the quick eye holds up the news to the day
part of a dog walking by upside down  in the roadside puddle
where the ripple was  the fisherman casts his line; another ripple
quiet strokes of night swimmer: the slap  of beaver tails . . .
never expecting the lilies in november  nor the small coffin
the room's smallness  fills with light  this morning of snow
the way of the conch  blueing in the sea, and echoing in the wind
leaving all the morning glories closed
old frog  up to his ears  in moonlight
reaching into sky the girl breaks the wish  bone of geese
in a dark bag onions  sprouting
still lake  a hawk makes off  with its image
skiers! standing  on the wind
night crossing  tijuana border guard  in sunglasses
small town  the same dream  as last night
half-empty cup  i decide ive had enough of you
middle age  in the mirror the turn toward it
wedding day the time he takes to knot the tie
stick figures including one i recognize
boy girl party  the slow speed  of the blender
life and death decisions  the need to feel  the satin lining
perfect storm the perfume not hers
phantom pain  the shape of her  in a stranger
death watch she dies peacefully in their sleep
rain gauge  the pastor talks  about grief
waiting room  a fly climbs the stairs on an escher print
my third glass of wine  the mosquito  comes back for seconds
philosophy class  i talk myself into a corner
old faithful  the crowd arrives right on time
undressing the summer wind turns color
father's day--  a potato  without a face
stirring my coffee  every which way flamenco
a watermelon smile drips off the end of my elbows
trick-or-treat  a sailboat's name reflects in the sea
martin luther king day  i readjust  my rear-view mirror
my skeleton going for a walk  in the cemetery
mother's day  she puts me on hold
the stylist rinses away the sound of her voice
their first thanksgiving  posing together with the turkey
graduation day  in the gait of our son  your younger strid
kona wind an ocean between me and my worries
new bride the squeak of her sweet corn being shucked
old timers' game  seventh inning stretch  the creaking of knees
street corner memorial  my four-year old  asks for the balloon
busy italian restaurant happy birthday  sung to the wrong table
tokyo vending machine the long line behind the foreigner
old palm reader . . . my life line  her longest yet
engagement ring he decides  it looks real enough
parade march  the old vet with canes  refuses to ride
first day of school her brother's backpack  with legs
inviting aromas . . . the hostess asks  will it just be me
our pilot hopes to see us again real soon the intercom clicks
candlelight dinner  she fingers the rose  to see it it's real
stale cookie  i give away the fortune
wrong date  the thickening skin on her latte
a new boyfriend the same lingerie enticing again
feeling the shape of the wrapped gift i put on a polite face
first date  the little pile of anchovies
mistaking telephone for doorbell  i let loneliness in
arguing a deaf man grabs  the other's hands
crossing the hopscotch  two old women avoid the lines
dentist's obituary  common interests  we could never talk about
as if it were spring  the green mold  on the cheese
psychic fair  she brushes some dirt from the cards
centerfold: the model's navel off-center
day moon  a fresh tattoo rises  out of her jeans
independence day  i struggle to free myself from a wet swim suit
fresh blueberries a 'gothic' teenager darkens her lips
switchbacks five or six cub scouts  an octave higher
my father and i paint the barn  compare wars
picnic  in the sun-dappled courtyard  my freckled banana
in the dream  my dog has a whistle  only i can hear
rodeo cowboy  hopefully clutching a handful of sky
two-way glass the patient waits inside  the therapist's reflection
rush hour the blonde in the porsche peels an orange
scar on her cheek she gets her lipstick just right
grocery shopping  his python tattoo squeezes the charmin
on display: her small and firm  opinion of men
conservatory, the carnivorous plants  behind glass
grinding sausage meat she recounts the times  her husband cheated
aftershock  the picture on the wall straightens
in the middle of making love  counting syllables
nudist camp where to begin  with the sunblock
clothesline the shirt shows off its biceps
open mike night the audience  goes dead
getting acquainted  i learn another name  for wild radish
divorced  she cleans the ring around the tub
after lovemaking  returning to ourselves
nest of black hair  secured with ball-point pens  office geisha
naked at the ironing board  concentrating on a crease
round and round debating  circumcision
freezing wind the body builder pumps gas  in a muscle shirt
werewolf movie  at the commercial letting the dog out
winter rain holding the umbrella  over the dachshundpissing
the clerks lip ring i forget  what i wanted
in the midway sun corn on the cob customers grinning ear to ear
school library  such quiet  books
at the fence  they sit on their tractors  talking hay
three surgeons  five nurses wrong leg
full moon i iron a wrinkle  into his pants
valentines day  she reminds me  to fasten my seatbelt
before the guests arrive  i straighten  the straight cushions
a lull in her hands the hairstylist asks  how i part my hair
in one room everything she has  and a window
floating  in the dishwater  a pair of chopsticks
serious she takes off her sunglasses  to speak english
nude beach  an empty bikini turns me on
dropping valentine chocolates he quickly swaps them for another box
leaning back  in their chairs old friends reunited
saving her best dishes  for a better day  my eighty year old mother
fireflies my neighbor has more
blowing out one birthday candle:  the whole family
just married  the attendant pumping too much gas
family reunion  everywhere i look my old nose
identical twins their hair neatly parted  on opposite sides
at the flea market  looking through books i gave away
nightfall the zookeeper lets himself out
tourist town  postcards of the waterfall  racked upside down
carrying their canes  two old women lean  on each other
first date  in the parking lot  our car doors touch
parents coaxing baby to eat mouths wide open
handsome vendor my name on a grain of rice
driving lesson done father and daughter run fingers through their hair
naked on the bathroom scales  stomach held in
reconciliation  the candle between us sputters
his ashes scattered what to do  with the box
nude beach  his enormous  sand castle
letting the dog out letting the dog in  wrong dog
a gusting breeze  the comet wobbles in my binoculars
long walk home  kicking a stone for company
christmas day the exchange  of custody
honeymoon trip  he refuses to stop  for directions
clicking off the late movie . . . the couch cushion reinflates
opening night . . . missing the entrance  of the night blooming cereus
forgetting his underwear  the one with so many  frequent flier miles
summer concert  fanning myself faster during the scherzo
overmatched boxer his eyes closed before the fight
yard sale:  she takes the baby crib back into the house
his toe answers mine  a truce begin
making sure nothing grows the rock gardener
too quick to reply  cutting my tongue on the envelope
grandfathers funeral  cousin kate, air kissing, spies a mirror, checks her makeup.
in a semi circle  retired sisters watch wheel of fortune
dissatisfied  with her virgo horoscope  she tries pisces
first time  at the zoo my son watches the people
antiquities room  the curator asks  so whats new?
meeting her boyfriend our handshake out of synch
from the holy land  he sends a postcard of cracks two thousand hears old
polaroid of her lover coming clearer  with time
visitors day  buttons just right  her dress inside out
blueberries we show each other  our tongues
battered child  . . . kicking the swing higher
a pause in the lecture  all at once three students  cross their legs
cropped grass r2 =  the tethered goat
whacking the bat  with a broom, she says  they attack people
clear about everything  the window washer
dining out  next to the window  her coat
late spring blossoms  the silhouette artist facing  another ponytail
balloon man selling pins  for popping
on the same bus the same strangers  as yesterday
new neighbor  eyeing the worn path  between our houses
a man swept by  in a wave rising, falling sees us see him drown
fingering my tattoo granddaughter asks  when she can have numbers
the words unspoken . . .  waiting for the toast to pop up
drilling deeper my dentist talks me into  amnesty international
methodical husband: on his list of chores, she finds  her name
running down  fight illiteracy  the gangs red paint
drunken sailor  loses both shoes  tying one on
eating alone  my alphabet soup  speaks to me
lunch with her lovers wife  leftovers
hole in the ozone my bald spot . . .  sunburned
after kindling  his passion . . . she lights his cigarette
nurses station  above the heart monitors  a soap opera
how desirable in the thrift shop window my old mag johng set
hopscotch a one legged man  raises cane
young lawyer  his briefs  in the snow
in his mothers house  he walks into the cobweb  she underlooked
feel the warmth of  bashos frogpond just xeroxed
behind shadow proof blinds  the calligraphers word processor
spring rain milk in her left breast unexpectedly sweeter
spring evening  the children's promise  not to get cold
jackknifed rig  the trooper waves us  into wildflowers
the numbness  of scar tissue  forsythia
autumn wind in his sweater pocket the missing button
squash vines  long and hollow the last late evenings
dim light the night nurse describes the rain
late summer black men spreading tar on the side road
knowing your cough  but not your face invalid neighbor
spring plowing  a flock of blackbirds turns inside out
squash vines  long and hollow the last late evenings
dusk  up to my ears in birdsong
all around  light falling in a field  of fireflies
independence day  i let him touch a little bit of me
snake hunting the boy sheds his shirt
whistling he  hangs the birdhouse he  built
summer evening  fanning myself  with a paper moon
close lightning the metallic taste  in my mouth
garden work talking to each other back to back
dry heat  to the same withered flower a bee returns
starry night  biting into a melon full of seeds
i brush my mothers hair the sparks
snowflakes glued  to the kindergarten window  no two alike
undefended: in the cold rain  their snow fort
faint city stars  the moths copper dust in my palm
fathers funeral mother  suddenly small
porch swing now and then a breeze from the river
january thaw  the narrow path fading away
spring planting her refusal to compromise
logging road  the pileated woodpecker flings its cry ahead
ill again a dry leaf  across porch boards
leaving the park  glimpses of cherry petals on the soles of shoes
lily pond with one step the snowy egret moves the moon
the white v of a killdeers wings  opening in the wake of its cry
snow  softening the night
a pile of rocks shifting in spring rain the stiff old man
getting louder  the calf  the auctioneer
bird shadow from tree shadow  to fence shadow
i climb the mountain with my eyes never ending snow
the petals scatter  over graves swept and unswept
a single leaf falling and with it the morning dew
mountain rose from thorn to thorn a spiders line
coming out of the woods the sound of crickets,  the empty sky
an old woman with bread waves the geese down  from the sky.
over the earths edge  they all gothe white clouds and the one sailboat
long beards longer  black clothes darker  under july sun
amish gentleman's warm smile brief . . .  my skirt long and plain
an amish grin as he cycles past the station selling gas
the gloom within  a handcrafts store . . .  dolls with missing faces
facing mirrors  long-skirted woman  and her amish child
music on the wind an amish foot softly taps and abruptly stops
late night camp . . . now a gentle lullaby  horse hooves heading home
falling leaves  day by day  the house grows brighter
darkening path  the white morning glories lead the way
in a backyard two women folding sunlight  into sheets
late autumn the billboard's shadow leans  into the woods
from the stream two mallards fly straight up  through falling leaves
new year's eve blizzard a neon beer-sign glows  behind the steamed window
spring breeze the woods road is still wet under the pines
the old watering can  hangs one more rainbow  among the roses
the evening paper on the darkening lawn first star
a letter stuck  in the 11th floor mail chute  summer night
the blues singer  tells how bad it is then the sax tells you too
quiet afternoon in the meadow, one daisy  leans on another
at the end of a tunnel in the clouds  a sunlit billow
crossing the tracks at twilight the autumn wind
chilly sunrise  a strip of bark flutters  on the lake-side birch
twiddling my thumbs the sun goes down,  the moon comes up
winter drizzle  unloading a crate of live ducks behind the chinatown restaurant
snow melts by the hardware counter  the squares of color  in the paint catalog
in the mirrors on her dress little pieces of my self
a few blocks  from the street festival  the evening quiet
at the pow-wow  they pass out ordinary saltines for the ceremony
while his passengers sleep, the bus driver watches dawn break
by the lawn's edge, the dog barks at the darkness then looks back at me
dead end  a few leaves circle in the headlights
late at night a woman alone in the restaurant addressing christmas cards
snowy morning the barber appears  in his mirrors
moonrise  the columbine still swinging
changing pitchers the base-runner looks up  at a passing cloud
in the subway the young conductor cues  imaginary oboes
climbing the stairs more slowly autumn evening
the frozen puddle kids slide over a pattern of red leaves
snow drifts above the bear's den  starry night
cold spring rain  a piece of grass sticks out of the birdhouse
up in the sky hardly heard, hardly seen:  migrating birds
sundawn a flutter of mourning doves,  & poised, light-bathed, one faun  nearby, a bell tolls changes
mapletree buds, their small shadows in water-glazed mud nearby, a bell tolls changes
white lilac fragrantly exuberant  beside the porchdeck  nearby, a bell tolls changes
putting down a book to listen to the god  in the half-cleared brook nearby, a bell tolls changes
high noon straight-up trunks of poplars shadowless  a foreshadowing ... soon, soon? nearby, a bell tolls changes
watching a program  on brazils rain forests,  anger poisons calm  nearby, a bell tolls changes
on the grass  two pitched-from-a-car beer cans. unthinking ass! nearby, a bell tolls changes
a cardinal's song blends with the brilliant sunset. surely, nothing's wrong?  nearby, a bell tolls changes
cicadas at dusk seventeen years hence, shall we see substance or husk?  nearby, a bell tolls changes
in moonlight  swish of owl wings, this heartstab: glitter can gloss blight  nearby, a bell tolls changes
first spring day  melting and melting and melting tracks of the mountain man.
night storm   a deeper dark unrolls across the prairie
removing her wedding ring she brushes t along her husband's name
woman touches a name  while looking at  an old photo
elderly couple  their faces reflected over their son's name
man in a filthy army jacket tries to scratch on his name
anzio beach   another wave gathers  and breaks
how many dew drops make up these walls?
on razor wire squats a crow winter night
the guards in their towers: silk worms in cocoons of light
black-uniformed winter fly  greeting me behind bullet-proof glass
walls of ice  deep in forests frozen frogponds
my silver shackles  gossamer threads  under these stars
old guard escorting me  coughing like bullfrog  cigarette smoke for breath
prison cat in shadows stalking the shaft of searchlight
capturing snowflake fireflies with my tongue
beating time with nightstick, cricket sound while i urinate
oh, winter moon,  what have you done now  keep-locked with the mountains?
a thousand temple bells the noise of the cell block
suddenly they all look like green bullfrogs!
decorating my cell again  i notice roommate a silverfish on my pillow
from out of hendersons haiku, my old wifes photograph:  cells doors automatically locking.
soothing rain:  the mown meadow releases  pungence of mint
butterfly shadows   not finding the butterfly
abandoned farmhouse:  bird nest in the mail box also deserted
abandoned farmhouse:  wallpaper peeling back to my childhood
abandoned farmhouse:  something scratching  inside the furnace
abandoned farmhouse:  the quiet bedroom where i feared the dark
abandoned farmhouse: a  yellowed grocery list taped to the counter top
abandoned farmhouse: a  moth flies out of the water faucet
abandoned farmhouse:  my daughter snaps pictures of our visit
into old pots and pans  thrown out in the backyard  the musical rain
here & there  in bare treetops  mistletoe
in a shabby motel all night treefrogs in rain
cottonmouths  in the swamp ...  a house on stilts
**
family get-together all the eyes all the feelers  all the hands tearing shrimp
morning in the french quarter caf au lait & beignets with sparrows
the river wind blows  into the quarter  & through his saxophone
on the riverfront a stranger  takes my smile
the breeze  off the mississippi fills my skirt
behind grillwork  down darkness to sun  in a hidden courtyard
cool the alley  through the grillwork swirls  cat pee smell
in the morning shops  half the doorways fill with shade
all the mardi gras colors in the masks  in the houses
on the iron lace balconies  only flowers  sunning
from the suite dusk fills in the river  & all the tiny lights are slow
**
huge limbs of the live oak  their reaching out  over the young grass
in a pecan grove  wandering spring shadows  cows & blackbirds
parked on the runway  its wings drooped a b-52  the winter sun
the slow day ...  in the empty motel corridor a stack of dirty dishes
sundown in the empty bar  the player-piano keys begin
the big waitress departs  the china teapot  shakes
january sun ... the cotton fields dotted with leftovers
longest night his forehead burning  into my hand
what passion  you had, akiko  where can i put even an inch  of tonight's anguish!
sucking chocolate squares oh, it's a lonely beginning this first night of return  to japan
under this basholess  pre-dawn sky  how rough the angle of loneliness along this eastern sea
bent  like a puzzle in a child's hand,  that back before me in the pre-dawn dark
is it a walking umbrella? immense the black over that bent-against-the-wind angle of loneliness
a crane skipping before me  on this seaside road, its leg a karate lift?
i hug the boy to me how brave he was to point and say this is a pencil  this is a cup
on my office couch  i lean back,  back, this nescafe's  the length of my desire
in this bare  late-afternoon life i make  my bare dinner  and set out fork and knife
wanting to embrace  even a sleeve tonight's lonely angle
gone from the wood  the bird i knew by song alone
on lookout rock one step  to the red hawk
i a red shaft of light  dances on your moist eyelids: the searing morning.
ii  frog mountain rises to arch its back in the clouds: unforeseen downpour.
iii three men and three birds stand still in the forest, all  surprised by rain.
iv  rain like the deluge: a mudspattered apache sings in cibecue.
v the day hides itself  within a grove of aspen.  thunder pursues it.
vi  uprooted clouds:  summer holds the pale mountains,  calls down the clear night.
cajun cabin   the aroma of hot gumbo  floats on the bayou
gunshot!  the tide of gulls breaks  like a scattering wave
gathering silence in my mind is the hardest thing to do
against the wind's chill  i button my sweater feet dug in sand
the sun slips low a carnelian red paving  the water with dark light
how many wanderers  have followed the sun down?
(the girl with the soul of a gull never came back)
questions purl like schools of fish in dangerous waters
questions without breath without answers  a broken shell
on the cardboard box  holding the frozen wino:  fragile: do not crush
from the fire escape  the cry of the mourning dove  wintering over
new condominium its exhaust grate claimed by  a new derelict
wind chill minus five the piercing whistles of the starlings
the young mother  stoops to warm the child's mittens  between her gloves
between lace curtains the white cat's eyes  follow a snowflake
a crow flies down to land in the new snow its voice ringing
madison avenue  a row of ginkgoes mulched with old xmas trees
suet on a string  suspended from a snowy branch three sparrows make it spin
in the shadow of  office buildings, bagpiper's  amazing grace
last nights fading dream  on the blue teapot birds drift  beyond the willows
under cloudless skies;  nuclear resister jailed missiles free to fly
april sun slanting  across the exercise yard  jail-bar shadows
basketball stops  in the exercise yard  convicts shoot the breeze
this heat!  snow-clad mountains framed  by my jail cell window
little ladybug  caught after visiting hours:  doing jail time, too
starting a new month  in snohomish county jail; same old tea bag
chilly june morning in a spider web the jailhouse fly hangs
sixty day jail term as it grows shorter my growing beard
a swallowtail settles on the prize-winning quilt
summer afternoon  the priest takes a blue pencil  from the blind man
coming up through a gap in the city bridge. . a checkerspot butterfly
backfire  a checkerspot in its sound  shifts direction
dog coming out  with the cathedral crowd. . tail upward
half way home pole shadows reach across the widening road
train whistle two jets wrap the sky with mist
a block from home a pair of rain drops find my haiku notes
snow geese  sarah discovers the letter v
suddenly  twenty years later  you taste the same
through two marriages framed behind beethoven your picture
talking with him  i taste you in the tea you serve
on your porch only the breeze moves between us
in the dark car the scent of you  and the rainy fields
juice from the apple  runs into my beard  as i wait for you
in the mirror the only picture  of us together
your perfume  looking up startled at a stranger
in the cold fireplace my last letter  burning
still in the taste  of afternoon tea, my grandmothers brogue
a horse-drawn plow: sunflowers stand  in the traces
eaves pulling sound from the wind
walking alone the way oak leaves  refuse to fall
a steady rain the dentists drill  turning to snow
top of the falls  your voice somewhere  in its sound
the worm  far out on this paved lot more rain
autumn dusk the crooked road home
winter morning  the closet dark with  old shoes
the family gathered a tear of embalming fluid runs  from my brothers eye
a moth flies  through my breath in moonlight
bitter wind   the hand that cups the flame  aglow
the sound of scissors through quilt stuffing: chill autumn moon
autumn maple  a gust of yellow scatters the childs laughter
autumn sky  the wind folds and unfolds  a flock of sparrows
moving into the sun the pony takes with him some mountain shadow
paddling slowly through the reeds that touch her hair
the old woman looking into the stars  sky all snowy
against his coat  i brush my lips the silence of snowflakes
away from eyes  the stairwell holds us in its arms
that sonofabitch  on the corner has a knife the rain glistens on it
still childless:  milkweed
winters end a bitterness remaining  in the dried apricots
the old garden fence  now keeps the goldenrod from the goldenrod
thin icicles  on the telephone wire her distant voice
hoping the shape  of the navel will be good father cuts the cord
one cricket sound and silence lighting the autumn garden
hot rock by the stream  each of the babys toeprints evaporating
switching off the light switching off the shadows
in these dark   waters   drawn up from   my frozen well ...   glittering of spring
standing still   at dusk   listen ... in far   distances   the song of froglings!
i dreamed of   battles   and was slain...   oh savage samurai!   insatiable fleas!
in silent   mid-night   our old scarecrow   topples down...   weird hollow echo
women planting   rice...   ugly every bit   about them...   but their ancient song
wild geese write   a line   flap-flapping   across the sky ...   comical dutch script
dead my old   fine hopes   and dry my dreaming   but still...   iris, blue each spring
in this windy   nest   open your hungry   mouth in vain...   issa, stepchild bird
ballet in the   air ...   twin butterflies   until, twice white   they meet, they mate
on the death   of his child   dew evaporates   and all our world   is dew ... so dear,   so fresh, so fleeting
black cloudbank   broken   scatters in the   night ... now see   moon-lighted mountains!
seek on high   bare trails   sky-reflecting   violets...   mountain-top jewels
for a lovely   bowl   let us arrange these   flowers...   since there is no rice
now that eyes   of hawks   in dusky night   are darkened...   chirping of the quails
my two plum   trees are   so gracious ...   see, they flower   one now, one later
one fallen   flower   returning to the   branch? ... oh no!   a white butterfly
cloudbank   curling low?   ah! the mountain   yoshino ...   cherry cumulus!
fie! this   fickle world!   three days, neglected   cherry-branch ...   and you are bare
hanging the   lantern   on that full white   blooming bough...   exquisite your care!
april's air   stirs in   willow-leaves ...   a butterfly   floats and balances
in the sea-surf   edge   mingling with   bright small shells ..   bush-clover petals
the river   gathering may rains   from cold streamlets   for the sea ...   murmuring mogami
a gate made all   of twigs   with woven grass   for hinges ...   for a lock ... this snail
wind-blown,   rained on ...   bent barley-grass   you make me   narrow path indeed
arise from sleep,   old cat,   and with great yawns   and stretchings ...   amble out for love
white cloud of   mist   above white   cherry-blossoms ...   dawn-shining mountains
hi! my little   hut   is newly-thatched   i see...   blue morning-glories
in the city   fields   contemplating   cherry-trees ...   strangers are like friends
see, see, see!   oh see!   oh what to say?   ah yoshino ...   mountain-all-abloom!
green   shadow-dances ...   see our young   banana-tree   pattering the screen
don't touch my   plumtree!   said my friend   and saying so ...   broke the branch for me
twilight   whippoorwill ...   whistle on,   sweet deepener   of dark loneliness
reciting   scriptures...   strange the   wondrous blue i find   in morning-glories
many solemn   nights   blond moon, we stand   and marvel...   sleeping our noons away
mountain-rose   petals   falling, falling,   falling now ...   waterfall music
amorous cat,   alas   you too must yowl   with your love...   or even worse, without!
the laden wagon   runs   bumbling and creaking   down the road...   three peonies tremble
ah me! i am one   who spends his little   breakfast   morning-glory gazing
my good father   raged   when i snapped   the peony...   precious memory!
by that fallen   house   the pear-tree stands   full-blooming ...   an ancient battle-site
in the open   shop   paperweights on   picture books...   young springtime breeze
dim the grey   cow comes   mooing mooing   and mooing   out of the morning mist
take the round   flat moon   snap this twig   for handle...   what a pretty fan!
seas are wild   tonight...   stretching over   sado island   silent clouds of stars
why so scrawny,   cat?   starving for fat fish   or mice ...   or backyard love?
dewdrop, let me   cleanse   in your brief   sweet waters ...   these dark hands of life
lightning   flash, crash...   waiting in the   bamboo grove   see three dew-drops fall
ashes my burnt   hut ...   but wonderful   the cherry   blooming on my hill
life? butterfly   on a swaying grass   that's all ...   but exquisite!
glorious the   moon...   therefore our thanks   dark clouds   come to rest our necks
what a peony...   demanding to be   measured   by my little fan!
under   cherry-trees   soup, the salad,   fish and all ...   seasoned with petals
now from   cherry-trees ...   millions of maidens   flying   fierce war-lord storm
moon so bright   for love!   come closer, quilt...   enfold   my passionate cold!
too curious   flower   watching us pass,   met death...   our hungry donkey
cloud of   cherry-bloom ...   tolling twilight   bell ... temple   ueno? asakura?
must springtime   fade?   then cry all birds ...   and fishes'   cold pale eyes pour tears
a nursemaid   scarecrow...   frightening the   wind and sun   from playing baby
on her dead son   in what windy land   wanders now   my little dear   dragonfly hunter?
a saddening   world:   flowers whose sweet   blooms must fall...   as we too, alas...
describe   plum-blossoms?   better than my   verses ... white   wordless butterflies
lend me water please?   some fresh young   morning-glory,   careless ... took my well
a young sister   pitiful ... on my   outstretched palm   at dusk dies   the little firefly
you stupid   scarecrow!   under your very   stick-feet   birds are stealing beans!
afternoon   shower...   walking and talking   in the street:   umbrella and raincoat!
in the farther   field   a scarecrow kept me   company ...   walking as i walked
pretty   butterflies...   be careful of   pine-needle points   in this gusty wind!
ah, unrequited   love!   now elevate your chin   and keen   tom-cat, to the moon!
hi! kids   mimicking   cormorants ... you are   more like   real cormorants than   they!
buzzing the bee   trades   peony for peony   with the butterfly
such utter   silence!   even the crickets   singing...   muffled by hot rocks
far across low   mist   intermittently   the lake   lifts a snow-white sail
a white swan   swimming ...   parting with her   unmoved breast   cherry-petaled pond
for a cool   evening   i hired the   old temple porch ...   penny in the dish
quite a hundred   gourds   sprouting from   the fertile soul...   of a single vine
swallow in the   dusk...   spare my little   buzzing friends   among the flowers
old dark sleepy   pool...   quick unexpected   frog   goes plop! watersplash!
my shadowy path   i've swept all day   and now ... oh no!   camellia-shower!
hard the   beggar's bed ...   but sociable   and busy   with insect-talking
come come! come   out!   from bogs old frogs   command the dark   and look ... the stars!
over the   mountain   bright the full white   moon now smiles...   on the flower-thief
starting to   call you:   come watch   these butterflies ...   oh! i'm all alone
good friend   grasshopper   will you play   the caretaker   for my little grave?
a lost child   crying   stumbling over   the dark fields ...   catching fireflies
the snake   departed   but the little eyes   that glared...   dew, shining in the grass
ah! brave dragon-fly   ...   taking for your perch   this swatter   consecrate to death
i raised my   knife to it:   then walked   empty-handed on ...   proud rose of sharon
giddy   grasshopper   take care ... do not   leap and crush   these pearls of dewdrop
darting   dragon-fly ...   pull off its shiny   wings and look...   bright red pepper-pod
reply:   bright red pepper-pod ...   it needs but shiny   wings and look...   darting dragon-fly!
tiny sentences   brushing soft on   my shutters...   bush-clover voices
mirror-pond of   stars ...   suddenly a summer   shower   dimples the water
sadness at   twilight...   villain! i have   let my hand   cut that peony
in dim dusk and   scent   a witness   now half hidden...   evenfall orchid
now be a good   boy   take good care of   our house ...   cricket my child
wake! the sky   is light!   let us to the road   again...   companion butterfly!
stillness ...   then the bat   flying among   the willows   black against green sky
now my   loneliness   following   the fireworks...   look! a falling star!
stupid hot   melons...   rolling   like fat idiots   out from leafy shade!
for   morning-glories   i can foresee grave   danger...   single-stick practice
can't it get   away   from the sticky   pine-branches ...   cicada singing?
silent the old   town...   the scent of flowers   floating...   and evening bell
vendor of   bright fans   carrying his pack   of breeze...   suffocating heat!
voices of two   bells   that speak from   twilight temples...   ah! cool dialogue
deep in dark   forest   a woodcutter's   dull axe talking...   and a woodcutter
camellia-petal   fell in silent dawn ...   spilling   a water-jewel
in the twilight   rain   these brilliant-hued   hibiscus ...   a lovely sunset
friend, that   open mouth   reveals your   whole interior...   silly hollow frog!
butterfly   asleep   folded soft on   temple bell...   then bronze gong rang!
good evening breeze!   crooked and   meandering   your homeward journey
see the morning   breeze   ruffling his so   silky hair...   cool caterpillar
oh lucky   beggar!...   bright heaven   and cool earth   your summer outfit
the turnip   farmer rose   and with a fresh-   pulled turnip...   pointed to my road
flower in the   stream   thus too my lovely life   must end, another   flower...   to fall and float away
i am going out   ...   be good and play   together   my cricket children
not a voice or   stir ...   darkness lies on   fields and streets   sad: the moon has set
lady butterfly   perfumes her wings   by floating   over the orchid
if strangers   threaten   turn into fat   green bullfrogs...   pond-cooling melons
yellow evening   sun ...   long shadow   of the scarecrow   reaches to the road
a camellia   dropped down into   still waters   of a deep dark well
for the emperor   himself he will not   lift his hat ...   a stiff-backed scarecrow
in the holy   dusk   nightingales begin   their psalm...   good! the dinner-gong!
live in simple   faith ...   just as this   trusting cherry   flowers, fades, and falls
night is bright   with stars   ... silly woman,   whimpering:   shall i light the lamp?
black desolate   moor...   i bow before   the buddha   lighted in thunder
dirty   bath-water   where can i pour   you? ... insects   singing in the grass
wee bitter   cricket   crying all this   sunny day ...   or is he laughing?
a short summer   night...   but in this solemn   darkness   one peony bloomed
long the summer   day ...   patterns on   the ocean sand...   our idle footprints
angry i strode   home...   but stooping in   my garden   calm old willow-tree
oh do not swat   them ...   unhappy flies   forever   wringing their thin hands
see ... the   heavy leaf   on the silent   windless day ...   falls of its own will
rash tom-cat   lover...   careless even   of that rice   stuck in your whiskers
moon so bright   for love!   oh, hear the farmer   by that light...   flailing his lovely rice!
now the   swinging bridge   is quieted   with creepers...   like our tendrilled life
dancing in my   silks   money tossed itself   away...   pretty, this paper dress!
the sea   darkening...   oh voices of the   wild ducks   crying, whirling, white
white moth,   flutter off:   fly back into   my breast now   quickly, my own soul!
nine times   arising   to see the moon...   whose solemn pace   marks only midnight yet
watching, i   wonder   what poet could put   down his quill...   a pluperfect moon!
do your worst,   old frost   you can no longer   wound me ...   last chrysanthemum i
pebbles shining   clear,   and clear   six silent fishes...   deep autumn water
a bright autumn   moon...   in the shadow of   each grass   an insect chirping
you turn and   suddenly   there in purpling   autumn sky ...   white fujiami
here, where a   thousand   captains swore grand   conquest ... tall   grass their monument
yellow autumn   moon...   unimpressed   the scarecrow stands   simply looking bored
white chrysanthemum   ...   before that   perfect flower   scissors hesitate
cruel autumn   wind   cutting to the   very bones...   of my poor scarecrow
now in late   autumn   look, on my old   rubbish-heap ...   blue morning-glory
a single   cricket   chirps, chirps, chirps,   and is still ... my   candle sinks and dies
fireworks ended   and spectators   gone away...   ahd how vast and dark!
two ancient   pine-trees ...   a pair of gnarled   and sturdy hands   with ten green fingers
i must turn   over...   beware of local   earthquakes   bedfellow cricket!
oh! i ate them   all   and oh! what a   stomach-ache...   green stolen apples
now in sad   autumn   as i take my   darkening path ...   a solitary bird
at our last   parting   bending between   boat and shore...   that weeping willow
at furue in   rain   gray water and   gray sand...   picture without lines
oh sorry tom-cat   bigger blacker   knights of love   have knocked you out!
the old   fisherman   unalterably   intent...   cold evening rain
while i turned   my head   that traveler   i'd just passed ...   melted into mist
visiting the   graves ...   trotting on to show   the way ...   old family dog
will we meet   again   here at your   flowering grave...   two white butterflies?
so enviable...   maple-leaves   most glorious   contemplating death
shocking ...   the red of   lacquered fingernails   against   a white chrysanthemum
dry cheerful   cricket   chirping, keeps   the autumn gay ...   contemptuous of frost
deepen, drop,   and die   many-hued   chrysanthemums...   one black earth for all
before boiled   chestnuts   cross-legged lad   is squatting...   carved wooden buddha
defeated in the   fray   by bigger battlers   for love...   tom-cat seeks a mouse
asking their road...   seven yellow   bamboo hats   all turned together
torches! come   and see   the burglar i have   captured...   oh! my eldest son!
autumn   mosquitoes   buzz me, bite me ...   see, i am   long prepared for death
nice: wild   persimmons...   and notice how   the mother   eats the bitter parts
gray marsh,   black cloud   flapping away   in autumn rain   last old slow heron
first white   snow of fall   just enough to bend   the leaves   of faded daffodils
what a gorgeous   one   that fat sleek huge   old chestnut   i could not get at ...
none broke the   silence...   nor visitor   nor host ... nor   white chrysanthemum
if you were   silent   flight of herons   on dark sky ...   oh! autumn snowflakes!
chilling autumn   rain...   the moon, too bright   for showers,   slips from their fingers
rainy-month,   dripping   on and on   as i lie abed...   ah, old man's memories!
november   sunrise...   uncertain, the cold   storks stand ...   bare sticks in water
from dark windy   hills   voices driving   weary horses ...   shouting of the storm
slanting lines   of rain...   on the dusty   samisen   a mouse is trotting
oh former   renter   i know it all, all ...   down to   the very cold you felt
gray moor,   unmarred   by any path ...   a single branch ...   a bird ... november
lonely umbrella   passing the house   at twilight...   first snow falling soft
carven gods   long gone...   dead leaves alone   foregather   on the temple porch
five or six of   us   remain, huddled   together...   bent old willow-trees
plume of pampas   grass   trembling   in every wind...   hush, my lonely heart
tea-water,   tired   waiting while we   watched the snow...   froze itself a hat
cold first   winter rain...   poor monkey,   you too could use   a little woven cape
winter rain   deepens   lichened letters   on the grave...   and my old sadness
cold winter   shower ..   see all the people   running   across seta bridge!
old weary   willows...   i thought how long   the road would be   when you went away
no oil to read   by ...   i am off to bed   but ah!...   my moonlit pillow
descending   seaward   far-off mountain   waterfall...   winter nights are still
all heaven and   earth   flowered white   obliterate...   snow ... unceasing snow
considerate   dogs ...   stepping off   into the snow   as i walk the path
but when i   halted   on the windy street   at twilight...   snow struck against me
call him back!   ah no,   he's blown from sight   already...   fish-peddler in the snow
crossing it alone   in cold moonlight...   the brittle bridge   echoes my footsteps
such a little   child   to send to be   a priestling   icy poverty
windy winter   rain...   my silly big   umbrella   tries walking backward
buddha on the   hill...   from your holy   nose indeed   hangs an icicle
this snowy   morning   that black crow   i hate so much...   but he's beautiful!
look at the   candle!   what a hungry wind   it is...   hunting in the snow!
if there were   fragrance   these heavy snow-   flakes settling...   lilies on the rocks
ah! i intended   never never   to grow old ...   listen: new year's bell!
snow-swallowed   valley:   only the   winding river...   black fluent brush-stroke
roaring winter   storm   rushing to its   utter end ...   ever-sounding sea
eleven brave   knights   canter through the   whirling snow...   not one bends his neck
going   snow-viewing   one by one the   walkers vanish...   whitely falling veils
"yes, come   in!" i cried...   but at the windy   snow-hung gate   knocking still went on
see: surviving   suns   visit the ancestral   grave ...   bearded, with bent canes
the orphan   speaks:   the year-end party...   i am even envious   of scolded children
i gave the   greetings   of the bright   new year ... as though   i held a plum-branch
on jolly new   year's day   my last year's bills   drop in   to pay their compliments
death-song:   leaf alone, fluttering   alas, leaf alone,   fluttering ...   floating down the wind
death-song:   i have known lovers...   cherry-bloom ...   the nightingale ...   i will sleep content
death-song:   fever-felled half-way,   my dreams arose   to march again...   into a hollow land
death-song:   three loveliest things:   moonlight ... cherry-   bloom ... now i go   seeking silent snow
driftwood beach wondering if it's too late to put down roots
caressed by sea air oranges swell with the sight  of gogoshima
menage a trois  on a citrus tree  summer dreams
orange blossoms --  on the piano lid  a sky full of stars
cycle-weary a yen for the ferryman
spring pedaling on the marine road  through the islands
the wake  of an upstream eel  in dawn's light
marina -- i cast anchor near the moon
matsuyama bay ancestors come and go with the tide
after the storm whose life will go on nobody knows
driftwood:  the way an old dog  settles his chin on your knee
airport sunset  cherry notes  in the sake
life goes on  though my bike isn't here spring breeze
part-time job wearing a pirate's skull cap  sunken boats
last rites . . .  rain fading into  bird song
sunlit poppy . . .  the swirl of her red skirt
bluest  on forgotten graves --  wild myosotis
delivery room-- the gentle light  of the beginning
huckleberries-- capturing the night in the jam jar
clearing sky  the gum tree bursts into  rainbow lorikeets
child soldiers--  a young buck takes the moon on its antlers
the whistle of a wood duck . . .  her last breath
still there . . . soul of the caterpillar in the butterfly
sunlight through fog . . .  the half-life of falling leaves
leaf-cast shade a hoverfly moves around a spot of sunshine
snow in the treetops--  a lullaby too heavy for her to sing
moon and star ... a stray goose becomes an echo
so soft the snow no heroic measures
first light-- the tree explodes with blackbirds
first autumn colour-- taking the heirloom meant for my sister
first pond freeze a water beetle pushes against the ice
harvest moon  walking through a van gogh
solar eclipse...  folding, unfolding  moth wings
what was left by the riverside... deepening dusk
white butterfly drifting through all  she left behind
white peony tea-- snow so fine the night  has flowered
the soft snow falls on the hill, on my roof and on the homeless
cold winter day she phones her mother who says: <who are you?>
half-light a dinghy adrift
late winter sunset slides across lake ice
spring melt his ashes still not scattered
alone this winter counting the nights counting the stars
her owl (as if it were hers)  holed up  in the old oak
fallen bread knife  the waiter picks up a slice of sky
dark shadows  trying to make sense  of her x-ray
some wounds take forever to heal  tonight's red sky
through the screen door a cat's meow and lilacs
honeycomb...  everything she can't  remember
a red ribbon  writhing in the street  bitter cold
solstice  the incense changes direction
fallen leaves we kick thru  their beauty
one way into the labyrinth  a maple key
grapefruit harvest  the morning sun left dangling
so much better  than we could do  the frog's stillness
g l     i  n  r a t s   g          s  i          it w t a
sawdust father pauses to finish the story
parade day... another blue balloon  floats from reach
american dream  in each shop window a different moon
folding sheets  the weight of a flag  still in my arms
snowbound:  the rosebushes  up to their hips
once before you go  receding snowbank tell me your secrets
snowstorm you've gained at least a pound  snowman!
tidy kitchen  knives all hidden but handy
bikini top  pinned to the park noticeboard  end of summer
side by side  in the hammock  two unread books
a red maple leaf  that forgot to fall...  he fingers his shrapnel scar
setting off beeps in my smoke detector  a daddy longlegs
to that scythe moon looming over the hospice  his tranquil yielding
stargazer lilies  my quantum  of time
whispers of a fragrance my sister loved evening in spring
snowflakes... all the little  self-indulgences
star gazing...  one frog answers  another
night comes early the last of the potatoes  have eyes
indian paintbrush the myriad colours  of a fire rainbow
the long day  a maple key's twirl wherever
intermission  a fly on the piano  walks a full scale
morning hush  the fisherman casts a thread of sunlight
spring evening  playing my piano  for all the street to hear
daylight moon the chrysanthemums  have covered your name
4-way stop  everyone waits  for the red corvette
autumn light  just this much  to go on
mountain clearing a hawk carves all the rest
farmer's scythe a harvesting song in each sweep
endless rain  in my mother's kitchen  the snap, snapping of beans
a heat wave the butterfly fans its shadow
autumn foliage past its peak  the pathway home  in sepia
meadow pond our blades slice figures  on the moon
retirement home each time the heron comes another goldfish gone
foreign airport a baby's cry  takes me farther from home
they all hush when she walks past sparrows in the hedge
cattails in moonlight no such urges at my age
the only sound  a blue dragonfly  between bulrushes
the turning tide at standstill sandhill cranes
persimmon still hanging the extra day of the year
light snow  a sweep of starlings  over the barn
a strange cat crouched on the welcome mat the short day
ice storm the crackle of wood in the fire
sundown wild geese gather on the silver lake
sugaring off  the staccato tapping sound  of a woodpecker
father's day  the kite string pulls from my hand
waning moon the fox's bloody footprint  in the snow
after the air show  turkey vulture  quietly soars
the paramedic feeling for a pulse fireflies
in her hand the downed branch dancing again
white ice on the willows  my hand slipping  into yours
long spring evening:  double-decker gets fitted with new ads
a sliver of clay  flies off the potter's wheel  the moon almost full
fading harbour light  becoming brisker  her brush strokes
first warm day  father gets out his cap and cane
the train's whistle for a moment long grass blowing west
the wad of paper  uncrumples  longest night
more news of the war  looking deeper  into my dog's eyes
sugar maple the fingerless gloves of the fiddler
a whitetail flickers  into birch... what time i have left
valentine's day the twinging  of angina
solstice  minnows darting above their darker selves
silhouette  the moon outlines her single breast
his sister's funeral  trimming his hair before he goes
wild geese in flight  suddenly the sky  so wide
call of a loon... cove light and shadow ripple in
summer afternoon  settling into its shadow  the old labrador
keeping them for a day  the broken pieces of the heirloom bowl
on the old wall pictures of the past  the plaster falling.
easter sunday neighbours on their knees weeding
frozen lake a crack, cleaving silence to silence
into his trousers the old tailor  pressing winter light
quiet suddenly, and crossing the summer lake  the rain comes in sheets
autumn woods  a patch of low sunlight just out of reach
the hurricane's approach  in the dark, a hickory nut  bounces off our car
moon at our window  the evening still bright enough to sew that button
three days of downpour  my only horizon an old umbrella
first day of spring mosquito larvae wriggling in a dinosaur track
currents taking us beyond all the time  we care to measure
heat wave...  a memory of ocean rushes in
dreaming in the flames  the stack of burning twigs  falls into nothing
path of pine needles... he adds her to his christmas list
passing train water droplets cling  to the pussy willows
remembering dad as the day of his passing approaches
relaxing my arm butterfly on the bullseye
looking for work  the cold deepens  in the elbow joints
trying to call it off her face keeps changing in leaflight
sudden shower the boys dash out without shoes
first trick or treat  the toddler reaches for her mother's face
christmas eve the jostle of umbrellas in a crosswalk
alone even the moon slips away
all the departure times have faded... a thin autumn rain
waiting-room radiator paper leaves  tremble against their pins
late december evening a fox tail tapers to nothing
old couple worrying what will eat the crocuses this spring
this side of snow steam rising  from the rice bowl
the clackity-clack  of the last roller coaster  a crescent moon
grosbeak's song i brush on one more wall color sample
the long day  he plants more tomatoes than we can eat
north wind  a glistening drip of snot from the rancher's nose
resting in the wheelbarrow  last year's scarecrow
ringing phone the bathroom scale  recenters itself
stillness...  the surveyor's orange ribbon  divides the fog
stuck in traffic  the white billboard bigger than the moon
the moon  has found it for me a mountain path
shift change  a coalminer squints in the snowfall
first snow  how lightly the cat steps
old priest, his fingers dark  with newsprint
saddle shop the worn seat of her jeans
autumn evening  she lays out his clothes  on the bed
voices  ring  in this old tree
in the shadow of lilacs a cat with her nose in the air
the days shorten  seeing less and less  of our neighbours
open market the gypsy baby clutches a grape in her fist
90 this year  the fisherman reels in  a fighting trout
morning sun a patch of frost  in the holstein's shadow
autumn dusk...  a weathered hand waves  from the train
first night of snow sifting through his box of old buttons
checking the obituaries the dead leaves curl under
our arguement lasts long into the night the windy trees
snowy morning crows trading places  in the tree of heaven
daydreaming child   cloud in a puddle
cloudy day  giving the prism  a twirl
after love  this sweet burst  of cherry tomato
dried tadpole stuck with a pin  ticking sleet
alone again ...the last raspberry sharp on my tongue
leaves falling  the sudden blackness  of branches
midsummer rains the glass on the stoop  half-full...
breast self-examination a moth batters  the screened window
crosswinds  just a black centre on the straw poppy
autumn butterfly  open  on the warm boulder
cold and overcast...  dipping my banana slice into sunflower seeds
fresh bloom of lilac  my steps slow
today the tulips  tightly closedmy little boy's sullen face
fly caught  in an abandoned web ...summer solstice
late august pushing through cornstalks  midnight racoons
opening slowly  in the warm kitchenthe last frost-scarred red rose
from reed to reed a blackbird follows its song
snow  the mourners  huddle closer
full moon bullfrogs all night
shadows shifting  over the reed bed dark      light
mistletoe his smile lines deepen  her blush
farmer's market a child follows her stroller  filled with potatoes
cormorants  on the dock wings open  to greet the ferry
june: a sprinkle of rain turning  bales to hay again
jagged hole in thin lake-ice  the wolf's eyes
lake louise silently i sit inside a photograph
reed shadows  merge into the pond faint coyote's howl
frost at the window a bowl of white rice  steaming
so close the living the dying   roses in a blue bowl
the carousel spins  a girl's delirious laughter july evening...
my delighted dog  gives me the grand tour amid  the rain-soaked blossoms
difference of opinion the student's loud voice
their last picnic a cold wind folds her corner  of the blanket
selfish mother  her voice does not reach  white chrysanthemums
small stirrings deep within the leaf pile the cat's eyes darken
planting tulips for a moment  liking myself
months after chemo  i find her hair in the bluebird's nest
rain, song in a field grandfather's long hoe flying sprouts row beside row
first day of spring.  a little girl drawing the sun on the sidewalk
image of the moon streaked by a flock of birds  just for a while
end of october  in the vase without flowers stale-smelling water
walking in the woods  a chestnut drops on my head:  autumnal greeting
after the funeral the onion moves him to tears
meeting with boss i knot and then unknot  my tie
an empty field--  a forgotten scarecrow in late autumn
window moon-- the quiet sound between tick and tock
with thin threads a spider knitted a fly in a white cradle
cherries in bloom the delicate application  of makeup to bruise
funeral folding lilac scent into his burial flag
shifting expectations dandelion fluff
dusk on the mountaintop as if i had wings
forgotten garden  a fig tree enters the fog
solar eclipse your halo slips a little
rental truck  filling our house with echoes
spring sea  the fishing boats go out in pairs
eviction  i pack the pieces of my favorite bowl
summer sky  i stare into the blue of my baby's eyes
springtime  dust comes  to light
from god's lips to my ears  spring breeze
leaf color of an old song turning
death notice  daylilies divided for another garden
spring thaw the stone buddha  still still
crocus  after such a long time  saying yes
which way out the exterminator points with his spray tip
you can forget  how to ride a bike  autumn leaves
wildfire the night sky full of pine
mist at dawn  from the other side a loon's call
deepening twilight  no way to answer  the grosbeak's song
a long list of regrets the maple in autumn
rhubarb leaves  how they soften the pelting rain
zen garden  in the raked furrows  pine needles gather
pieces of sky in the forest canopy  summer's end
the honking of geese heading south  our wordless smiles
longest day the stallion drinks straight from the hose
a few leaves  still on the trees... the train's faint call
dead sea scrolls  my mother still has my baby teeth
family chapel my ancestor's patina  on the seats
cyber problem i borrow my neighbour's 9-year-old
after the funeral we get into our comfortable clothes
men's retreat toilet seats left down
secular guest thankful no one feels the need  to say grace
transit lounge  the toppled suitcase  left that way
funeral day family feuds  not laid to rest
autumn leaves...  learning  i'm dispensable
solstice moon the sound of the mousetrap  snapping shut
to each other in the dark waving lanterns
aspen...  i lose a word or two now and then
the old mare's grave  already dug april rain
mother's day card the attempt to say more with less written larger
the grief still fresh...  a leaf comes to rest  on its shadow
home office my wife sends me an email from the bedroom
overdue the librarian's smile
after the concert the conductor motions for his coat
retirement day  my plastic i.d. snaps in half
he talks about  his asset allocation  skimming bugs from the pool
the heart drawn in snow still falling
and so i agree  not to die before she does  the sound of crickets
water thrush... as if time never  visited here
mockingbird...  but there ought to be a moon
the gazing space  between us empty  deepening autumn
this day... snow blossoms on the plum tree
higher than the roof  the peace rose planted  three wars ago
used bookstore  the creaking stairway to poetry
corn maze we tell the kids  to get lost
the guest preacher  in his sunday best  passing thunder
frescoed chapel...  i insert a euro and then there is light
burial plot the salesman offers a free will kit
red lipstick  her laughter at his jokes louder than mine
sizing me up  the jeweler measures  her ring finger
summer  one bumblebee deepens the hum
weathered bench i open my palms to the winter sky
hollow center of the raspberry  mother's silence
ouija board evening through the trees a window of sky
cold morning  the saw's song changes  in the heartwood
the shadow  bigger than the pebble... hunter's moon
second miscarriage  chalk flowers dissolve  in a late spring rain
after the dentist prying open the oyster
night-nurse see how she tip-toes  over the moon
passing the cream puffs the guest of honor full of herself
reunion almost forgotten  the old me
my death poem rejected  i carry on
tax deadline  everybody says  it's nice outside
mackerel sky  the final wave  before you board
hiroshima day cigarette-pack cellophane uncrumpling
end of summer my garden in one wheelbarrow
valentine's morning returning redpolls  alight on fresh snow
the long stride of a stranger's walk  autumn sky
dark spots  in the honesty pods looming rain
summer solstice the backyard venus  knee-deep in weeds
family secrets  the shape of a popped kernel
funeral we pray a split second  after the priest
end of summer press one to confirm
from bee sting  to emergency room six stop lights
autumn dusk a word that will do for the one i can't find
contractions  the darkness  between stars
a rack of antlers nailed to the gatepost  lingering heat
gone to bed angry the din of summer insects
winter night  one ear listening to the pillow
unexpected visit  from an old friend  flowers on the bramble
spading the garden  each earthworm half goes its own way
honeymoon dinner  nothing to talk about until the tip
coughing, the exterminator  assures me  his work is safe
polite conversation i try to extract  the last cookie
reunion dance this time she lets him  crush her corsage
his cluttered house sorting through books on chaos theory
embarrassed by the lavish praise  i imagine getting
continental divide  i look for the place  to                    pee
old steeple a turban of pigeons unwinds the hour
sunflowers  the tube of cadmium yellow  squeezed flat
spring rain the chameleon busy  being green
road flares...  against the bent guardrail  an unknown flower
late afternoon  cow's udders  graze the ground
how heavy the empty can of slim-fast
the waterfall a tourist can't stop  talking
nursing home  my father the way i left him
carrying a pencil into the zendo  no point to it
practicing  her signature the newlywed
a phoebe's erratic flight this canoe trip won't solve anything
autumn sunset the wake of a tugboat sloshes ashore
indian summer rust on our hands from the swing
year end  a trail of footprints crosses the old pond
first snow  some time left  on the parking meter
trapped in the vinegar bottle mother
3-block main street the waitress asks if we want  menus
tourists talking  in several languages  the glassblower exhales
new snow  the arc the door makes
overnight rain  a reflection by the runway  levitates
tree-filled swamp...  the silent air  its own shade of green
evoking clusters  of algebraic symbols  smell of tangerine
table for one the candle flickers in an abalone shell
summer's end  he refuses  dialysis
bamboo whisk... the tea master's  fluid hands
condoms:  the checker asks me to slide  my card more slowly
japantown shop  the identical bellies of buddha and santa
uncle's trophy wife the slices of mango rimmed with green
body work the crucifix gleaming on the mechanic's chest
rewound movie she sleeps  through it again
funeral for the kid chosen last
redwood shade a banana slug eating  my worries
desert heat the lizard disappears into a snake
twin towers...  and yet the morning glory blooms
haiku judge i press ear to paper
board meeting a jumbo jet roars into his yawn
agate beach finally finding one in a gift shop
our song... it turns out  i misheard the lyrics
new year's morning  the bedroom radiator  begins to bang
rooftop prayers breaking the sound barrier  a blue angel
fish restaurant after the priest's blessing cold snapper
crosswalk a bickering couple  against the light
trees thick with leaves on the squirrel-proof feeder  supersquirrel!
removing  her sweater sparks fly
divorce papers: your, mine, and now ours
wildfire  the thermometer climbs  all night
morning rain  an egg for my father  spreads in the skillet
pear slice falling  to the kitchen floor  pale moonlight
snapdragons hearing the sound of  mother's sandals
childhood home  my concrete footprints  go nowhere
cloudless sky she cranks up the big white umbrellas
open-air t'ai chi the occasional clearing of a raven's throat
second heart attack he's careful now  hiding the polish sausage
moving day  again, i pack the china we never use
nude beach  the crowd around  the dead whale
almost dawn cupped in the curve of the moon the rest of the moon
autumn begins leaves follow me  into the shed
squash blossom  just enough dew to cool my face
cruising osprey how easily she slips  into dusk
chimney smoke moonlight changing directions with the wind
summer veranda  low night voices slip into  rocking chair rhythms
piano lesson... her braids outdo  the metronome
zen monk  adjusting the mike  on his robes
the rabbi rides a three-wheeled motorcycle  signed 'the kosher hog'
for her solo  the flautist's nipples  stand up
blackbirds in the cattails  i stand quietly with the mallards
fallow field  i harvest a fistful of oxeye daisies
high meadow opening myself  to the mountain's face
flowing past  the redwoods  the river
river stones  along her garden path wet with dew
spring morning... on a busy street two men  comparing tattoos
moonrise... screams from the roller coaster no longer seem near
child's kiss  swirling snow melting as it lands
cleaning everything out of the old cabin i reach  for a mote of light
stifled laugh:  a november wasp rousing itself
lunch date  carbonation keeps lifting his straw
his warm hand in mine the primrose path
sake  even in my microwaved cup a taste of the ancients
moving day  a dove-call settles in the chimney
spring melt the flat-bed leaks  on the uphills
morning twilight... horse asleep in the pasture covered with frost
along the trail trading one walking stick for another
back country  in the folds of my topo map the rise and fall of mountains
bifocals  the double pleasure of seeing you again
another year  stripping down for her  sweet corn
marble hallway  the child's scream  longer than her scream
he locks down the roller coaster  toothless grin
flight out of vegas arms crossed  six across
whistle stop... on and off the train  a butterfly
nets in place the fishing boat  becomes the fog
snow so deep  only the red flag of the mail box
foggy morning staring into the rosy depths  of hibiscus tea
morning mist  a workman whistles  no particular tune
almost visible  an owl on the verge of night
sifting pebbles my fingers pause to read  the broken one
her mind going  great-grandma's slippers  in her purse
senryu poet all those tight little lines  around her mouth
his side of it. her side of it. winter silence
the new employee  being shown around  crack in the wall
alpine bus ride the wildflowers almost distract me
downpour over paris everywhere  french puddles
white sail... whiter still, under my shading hand
after lovemaking  the clouds pull slowly  apart
a cicada rasps again  and again the baby  shakes her rattle
mountain fog  below the rope bridge nothingness
zen dining hall hand after hand waving  the fly away
frosty morning  the lifelss tracery of a lacewing
giving away her baby crib...  teeth marks on every bar
broken clock  from the goodwill bag the sound of ticking
going under anesthetic  one foot keeping time to the o.r. jazz
observation tower my grandson watching his spit fall
sweat lodge my only vision  is of the cool river
family meeting  our neighbors shut their windows
last trace  of the birth steam in the meadow  the morning star
early morning fog in the cereal bowl  the spoon clinks
off chemotherapy  one by one, great egrets depart the marsh willow
proposing...  the weightlifter's adam's apple goes up & down
the men's room  with piped-in light rock  one by one we dance
quaker meeting  through the open door the sound of a small boy's wee
beneath the green bay tree  a broken shell  a broken song...
the winter sun...low, lower at each stroke of this weathered mattock
snowbound...  the stained glass robin's song
tv tennis,  all the players on the sofa
alone               not caring  passing wind near the pig farm
one more ride with the top down winter stars
nursing home front porch  in sync out of sync in sync three old men rocking
the visible edges of the layered earth  where the stream splits it
above the whitewater  listening to both forks the gorge at twilight.
pachelbel's canon the harpist plucks  something in me
summer's end  jays find the cold campfire the cold potato
my self monopolizes me
calling home  my recorded voice tells me  i can't talk now
loft apartment: artist's nude model waves to window washer
snowman in the parking lot  anatomically correct
tight-fit of her jacket and one button  hanging-by-a-thread
leaving the o.r.  the brain surgeon's hairpiece askew.
first frost one puddle frozen the size of my skate
winter rain walking on ice  the way it wants to be walked on
bitter dawn stray cat licks the frost off fallen leaves
out of the lake the weight of a butterfly on my finger
autumn  an old man hurling apples at apples on the tree
winter wind after the dog is buried scratches on the door
measuring the curves  in a child's hand the wooly bear
not until the fog did the garden sprout silver webs
the way the breeze  ruffles his fur dead cat
noon day sun  old elephant  stands on its shadow
rust speckles the new saw left by the carpenter under the stars
acorn rain... cloud of wings beating  the first day of school
the bottom team en route to the ballfield lost again
mexican jumping beans i thought they were my vitamins!
instant tea ceremony  in the bag
at dusk a small witch offers a homeless man her bag of treats
from over or under  toilet paper end  always hiding
daywake the chirping  car alarms
art class:  nude model  slippery chalk
oversleeping  her doctor's appointment  in her dreams
there's something about it  the way a dog barks at the scarecrow
the circle  of the winging hawk now tightening to a dot
after-lunch siesta  nothing to break the silence  but the refried beans
charcoal  drawing the tree  it was
monks chanting  only  at  first are they  still temple  frogs
night cat pulls its shadow  along the picket fence
winter solstice the waterfall frozen  in mid-air
the cicada  sawing itself in two.
the chill ants in the flesh of the fallen pear
fifty years later once giggling teens avidly  comparing their ills
just as in childhood  before closing dad's coffin a kiss not returned
at his favorite deli  the bald man finds a hair in his soup
furious only a b+ on his paper on hubris
summer twilight a woman's song  mingles with the bath water
with the slow blue silence  the ice fisherman waits
lightning the doll's  pale face
high in the cherry tree a boy singing with his mouth full
one month after her death he still smokes outside
retirement home:  laundry sign  "no dying in these tubs."
cold march winds: hours in line at the tax office
bridal shower...  finding the male stripper the best man
forgiving him again again    the chill
class reunion no talk of how young we look  ...like last time
divorce papers  she puts a new battery  in her clock
the curandera lights a candle to the virgin before mixing the herbs
blank windows next door surprised to miss the neighbor  i didn't like.
she speaks of her pain all of the windows up
under the "ripe" sign at the fruit market my nine-month belly
wearing dark glasses, my friend visits  the psychic.
meeting an old friend both of us trying not to wear our glasses
wavering  above the pear juice  chopsticks
well-dressed matron her delight on finding  the heads-up penny
in the eye  of the cardboard politician seagull shit
daddy longlegs  evenings return to lamplight
the bell-ringers pause  hares race the wind across the hill
sunlight & dust the rolling colts socks kicked into air
shoulder blade  of the aged pony  a rivulet of rain
beyond windsong in the poplars cuckoo of the longest day
prints in the snow the same pace as yesterday
departing geese i am no longer  someones child
darkening the shade between touching apples the shadow of a wren
a nestful of feathers and tiny skulls   clouds without rain
billowing snow: the lamb quiet  beneath my coat
the moons apostrophe  everything i know learned from books
the long day ends leaning on a hazel crook
autumn sun the old dog rolls in the dust of the lane
faintly to the pleiades robin song
storm clouds ...  a sea eagles shadow sweeps the treetops
the war off again a higgledy-piggledy pile  of pistachio shells
spring rain i slip another iou  into his piggy bank
breeze-tousled ivy  the crook where the owl settles softened by snow
rain-soaked fell  out of the snow come the fleece and bones
a dusting of snow light on the apple skins
fast-moving storm the flagman's world slow and stop
sundown a red dust settles behind the plough
the geese still on the far end of the wind  the silent marsh
weekend over  rattle of a plastic soldier in my guitar
the weight  of a portable radio summer night
yellow but cold light in the river-mist
a stoat arcs into undergrowth thin winter moon
spring rain i've upset  the little stack of coins
evening star  a patterning  of bats
the newborn's hand  brushes my breast white camellias
the cries of lapwings in the darkness halo of the moon
caf breeze the beaded curtain's quiet chatter
in the dark i cradle snow on my tongue
the river high  the toll-keeper's chickens  lose half their run
estuary mud bleached in moonlight boat bones
slow day  the ant keeps returning to stanza one
night birth a lamb shakes fluids into the sleet
winter solitude the garden trellis leans  on a cloud
cumulonimbus  barn swallows skitter through the sailboats
adari pool  a noon gecko tracks the mosque shade
summer storm  galahs swivel on wires  to wash their wings
white spots on a brown butterfly's wing the baby's toes wave
high above the clouds checking out each passenger a stowaway fly
in the plastic cover  of a missing person notice  two snails feast
above the flood plain a double rainbow... promises  promises
noonday heat  the pony holds a mouthful of mountain stream
moonlight jaunt silver water sliding down an otter's whiskers
this wide sky in the grass  a thrush's broken egg
coal miner's cortege  above his valley  the slow storm clouds
out of bleakness in their hundreds the pink-footed geese
afterglow a taste of vine in the tomato
how still the morning watching a cormorant  watching the water
thin winds... in the empty barn a well-honed scythe
our shadows holding hands the width of the stubble field
naming the boulders my grandson asks  about divorce
november beach... the lone surf caster's thrust and parry
first snow  the pencil lady's eyes  catch mine
scattered clouds; lives not mine  walk the window ledge
now and again through wind-flattened grasses   the tips of the hare's ears
clouded light...  ripple crests edge  the egret's tail
eventide: salmon nets strung across an estuary, the bent backs  of fishermen
a sudden storm  closing my eyes i lean on the wind
grey spring morning...  just one car in the road  dotted with blossom
sun breaking  through storm clouds  gorse amongst the heather
sheep in the churchyard on the last day of summer more rain from the west
rushing shallows  a blackcap warbles  his short song
storm break all of the angles in the martin's flight
leaf fall the undoing done
zephyr  she whispers  it's me
dusk coming down  the drift of dry leaves against my shoes
among the splashes  a toy bucket of ocean dumped back in
moving day  in the shade of new leaves  the old things
for a moment  the sandwich maker  loses his rhythm
losing the dispute  she listens to grasshoppers
these yellow hills  i let the cow lick my palm
phone she dries herself more slowly
miles inland  the sound of the ocean  in the poplars
easter sunday a snail's empty shell on my doorstep
4th of july a young couple argue  in sign language
first hot day removing a kiwi from its jacket
outdoor concert the toddler asleep  kicking stars
tngrs bhnd the bk shds  txtg
all these stars she ties another knot in her embroidery
the small boy strikes the blind man's stick with his plastic sword
fireflies the space between stars
sky too blue  to trust
the whole moon  caught for a moment in the blackberry
summer's end  a boy skips a stone to the other side
the flat ends of a new pencil first day of school
sudden rain a flock of sanderling rise at the breaking wave
starless night  the first bite  of black bread
sultry night  the smell of jasmine  and old oranges
mosquito wing on the white pebble a spectrum
mist shrouded river the faint line  of oyster beds
first snow  candles light our canned soup dinner
river crossing in autumn  how the rocks now stand out
brink-of-war news draped over my shins  this anchoring child
tiny headstone  a pinwheel turns  the wind
ice cream van i still want to run outside
third day of rain her stance  softens
slack tide... we both reach for the same skipping stone
the scent of snow a workman pulls a leaf  from fresh cement
lightning bugs... the baby's lashes flutter against my cheek
spring rain scent a puppy tumbling  at my heels
grandma's album over the pressed sunflower  a small hand hovers
he speaks of you  and for a moment  it is you
floating mist she gathers goose eggs  in a porcelain bowl
in my dream i am accepted as a crow
crossroad shrine  a bevy of quail running beneath the briars
haiga workshop  in the downstroke of the brush  the sound of rain
beyond the fallen acorns  the ruin's gate slightly open
october sun a warm greenhouse tomato  settles in the palm
house clearance in the heart shaped locket  a faded soldier
summer remains  playing on the patio  the fuchsia's shadow
last glimpse of her garden  all those old shadows overlapping
another new moon  rises above the mountain  i need not climb
thru the wings  of a window moth  moonlight
notice of your death... thinking of the many laughs we had together
one tiny cloud  large enough  to blot out the moon
autumn chill  the house still creaks  in all the old places
old telescope a giant spider  beyond orion
death day of my son one thin cow  apart from the herd
parents' old home still pencilled on the door frame our childhood heights
those words in her final letter everywhere  craneflies
leaving home  taking a handful  of earth with me
banked fire a sigh from the watchdog  asleep in my arms
tiredness a floating feather settles  on the concrete
loner...  for a moment the sun's warmth as he enters deep woods
early to bed  a wild winter night in the downpipe
snowed in this frothy cappuccino  too hot to drink
ripe guava fruit  its sharp scent pierced by parrots' screeches
visiting her grave  everywhere the sounds of nestlings
autumn afternoon  in fresh concrete the pattern of a leaf
each time the train stops a mother resumes  her lullaby
late snow on kindergarten windows paper daffodils
lost  in the pampas grass geese shadows
night crossing  tijuana border guard  in sunglasses
small town  the same dream  as last night
half-empty cup  i decide ive had enough of you
middle age  in the mirror the turn toward it
wedding day the time he takes to knot the tie
stick figures including one i recognize
boy girl party  the slow speed  of the blender
life and death decisions  the need to feel  the satin lining
perfect storm the perfume not hers
phantom pain  the shape of her  in a stranger
death watch she dies peacefully in their sleep
rain gauge  the pastor talks  about grief
waiting room  a fly climbs the stairs on an escher print
my third glass of wine  the mosquito  comes back for seconds
philosophy class  i talk myself into a corner
old faithful  the crowd arrives right on time
undressing the summer wind turns color
stirring my coffee  every which way flamenco
a watermelon smile drips off the end of my elbows
trick-or-treat  a sailboat's name reflects in the sea
martin luther king day  i readjust  my rear-view mirror
my skeleton going for a walk  in the cemetery
mother's day  she puts me on hold
final note  my g-string too tight
wishbone  as we pull it apart i change my mind
my blind date disarming the alarm she invites me in
graveside service no one wants to leave first
soothsayer  by appointment  only
the stylist rinses away the sound of her voice
their first thanksgiving  posing together with the turkey
graduation day  in the gait of our son  your younger stride
kona wind an ocean between me and my worries
new bride the squeak of her sweet corn being shucked
old timers' game  seventh inning stretch  the creaking of knees
street corner memorial  my four-year old  asks for the balloon
busy italian restaurant happy birthday  sung to the wrong table
tokyo vending machine the long line behind the foreigner
old palm reader...  my life line  her longest yet
engagement ring he decides  it looks real enough
parade march  the old vet with canes  refuses to ride
first day of school her brother's backpack  with legs
inviting aromas...  the hostess asks  will it just be me
our pilot hopes to see us again real soon the intercom clicks
candlelight dinner  she fingers the rose  to see if it's real
stale cookie  i give away the fortune
wrong date  the thickening skin on her latte
a new boyfriend the same lingerie enticing again
feeling the shape of the wrapped gift i put on a polite face
first date  the little pile of anchovies
mistaking telephone for doorbell  i let loneliness in
arguing a deaf man grabs  the other's hands
crossing the hopscotch  two old women avoid the lines
dentist's obituary  common interests  we could never talk about
as if it were spring  the green mold  on the cheese
psychic fair  she brushes some dirt from the cards
centerfold: the model's navel off-center
day moon  a fresh tattoo rises  out of her jeans
independence day  i struggle to free myself from a wet swim suit
fresh blueberries a 'gothic' teenager darkens her lips
switchbacks five or six cub scouts  an octave higher
my father and i paint the barn  compare wars
picnic  in the sun-dappled courtyard  my freckled banana
in the dream  my dog has a whistle  only i can hear
rodeo cowboy  hopefully clutching a handful of sky
two-way glass the patient waits inside  the therapist's reflection
rush hour the blonde in the porsche peels an orange
scar on her cheek she gets her lipstick just right
grocery shopping  his python tattoo squeezes the charmin
on display: her small and firm  opinion of men
conservatory, the carnivorous plants  behind glass
grinding sausage meat she recounts the times  her husband cheated
aftershock  the picture on the wall straightens
in the middle of making love  counting syllables
nudist camp where to begin  with the sunblock
clothesline the shirt shows off its biceps
open mike night the audience  goes dead
getting acquainted  i learn another name  for wild radish
divorced  she cleans the ring around the tub
after lovemaking  returning to ourselves
nest of black hair  secured with ball-point pens  office geisha
naked at the ironing board  concentrating on a crease
round and round debating  circumcision
freezing wind the body builder pumps gas  in a muscle shirt
werewolf movie  at the commercial letting the dog out
winter rain holding the umbrella  over the dachshundpissing
birthmark removed she saves up  for a blue tattoo
denver mcdonald's...  the specials on the window  paint out the mountain
late february a statue of houdini encased in ice
30-year reunion he still  hits on her
snow buntings his new bride waits in the car
prostate exam the doctor and i  trade jabs
nude ballet the composer adds extra notes
the clerk's lip ring  i forget  what i wanted
in the midway sun corn on the cob customers grinning ear to ear
school library  such quiet  books
at the fence  they sit on their tractors  talking hay
three surgeons  five nurses wrong leg
full moon i iron a wrinkle  into his pants
valentine's day she reminds me  to fasten my seatbelt
before the guests arrive  i straighten  the straight cushions
a lull in her hands the hairstylist asks  how i part my hair
in one room everything she has  and a window
floating  in the dishwater  a pair of chopsticks
serious she takes off her sunglasses  to speak english
nude beach  an empty bikini turns me on
dropping valentine chocolates he quickly swaps them for another box
leaning back  in their chairs old friends reunited
saving her best dishes  for a better day  my eighty year old mother
fireflies my neighbor has more
blowing out one birthday candle:  the whole family
"just married"  the attendant pumping too much gas
family reunion  everywhere i look my old nose
identical twins their hair neatly parted  on opposite sides
at the flea market  looking through books i gave away
nightfall the zookeeper lets himself out
tourist town  postcards of the waterfall  racked upside down
carrying their canes  two old women lean  on each other
first date  in the parking lot  our car doors touch
parents coaxing baby to eat mouths wide open
handsome vendor my name on a grain of rice
driving lesson done father and daughter run fingers through their hair
naked on the bathroom scales  stomach held in
reconciliation  the candle between us sputters
his ashes scattered what to do  with the box
nude beach  his enormous  sand castle
letting the dog out letting the dog in  wrong dog
a gusting breeze  the comet wobbles in my binoculars
long walk home  kicking a stone for company
christmas day the exchange  of custody
honeymoon trip  he refuses to stop  for directions
clicking off the late movie...  the couch cushion reinflates
opening night...  missing the entrance  of the night blooming cereus
forgetting his underwear  the one with so many  frequent flier miles
summer concert  fanning myself faster during the scherzo
overmatched boxer his eyes closed before the fight
yard sale:  she takes the baby crib back into the house
his toe answers mine  a truce begin
making sure nothing grows the rock gardener
too quick to reply  cutting my tongue on the envelope
grandfather's funeral cousin kate, air kissing, spies a mirror, checks her makeup.
in a semi circle  retired sisters watch "wheel of fortune"
dissatisfied  with her virgo horoscope  she tries pisces
first time  at the zoo my son watches the people
antiquities room  the curator asks  "so what's new?"
meeting her boyfriend our handshake out of synch
from the holy land  he sends a postcard of cracks two thousand years old
polaroid of her lover coming clearer  with time
visitor's day buttons just right  her dress inside out
blueberries we show each other  our tongues
battered child  ...kicking the swing  higher
a pause in the lecture  all at once three students  cross their legs
cropped grass r = the tethered goat
whacking the bat  with a broom, she says  they attack people
clear about everything  the window washer
dining out  next to the window  her coat
late spring blossoms  the silhouette artist facing  another ponytail
balloon man selling pins  for popping
on the same bus the same strangers  as yesterday
new neighbor  eyeing the worn path  between our houses
a man swept by  in a wave rising, falling sees us see him drown
fingering my tattoo granddaughter asks  when she can have numbers
the words unspoken... waiting for the toast to pop up
drilling deeper my dentist talks me into  amnesty international
methodical husband: on his list of chores, she finds  her name
running down  fight illiteracy  the gang's red paint
drunken sailor  loses both shoes  tying one on
eating alone  my alphabet soup  speaks to me
lunch with her lover's wife leftovers
hole in the ozone my bald spot... sunburned
after kindling  his passion...  she lights his cigarette
nurse's station above the heart monitors  a soap opera
how desirable in the thrift show window my old mag johng set
hopscotch a one legged man  raises cane
young lawyer  his briefs  in the snow
in his mother's house he walks into the cobweb  she underlooked
feel the warmth of  basho's frogpond  just xeroxed
behind shadow proof blinds  the calligrapher's  word processor
flies wait it out under a cow's chin  spring shower
heartwood the saw changes its tune
snow field  the earth marked  by fallen angels
setting sun an accordion squeezes the night air
no moon the click of stilettos  on cobblestones
flowing estuary native languages  long gone
in the hot tub  my eyes on her floating breasts hunters moon
rosebud unfolding the seed packet left behind in revelations
no escaping this moonlight  pompeii
river mud the shape of boys
somewhere becoming rain becoming somewhere
desert twilight a map with many creases nailed to a cross
we huddle over mother's open grave  lawless winter
a long bus ride the prophetic language  of the stops
navajo moon the coyote call not a coyote
deleting words  from the eulogy falling leaves
calla lily  the sound of a ladder lengthening
tasting the well  in the water  summer stars
mother's day  the expiration date on wildflower seeds
northern lights...  the scratchy play of seventy-eights
a recurring escape from my father's dream
the big dipper  no matter where i stand mountain sky
summer passing  the yard flamingo's rusty legs
glint of sunlight:  the respirator carries on alone
all souls day...  my name called  from the front gate
autumn  an empty booster seat in the barber's window
hunter's cabin: of the woods  not of it
end of the walk returning the crow's feather  where i found it
cafe for sale outdoor tables rusting  into autumn
day lilies  another death date added  to the family tree
the house finch has a song for it,  morning after snow
crescent moon a bone carver sings to his ancestor
close enough to touch i let the junco lead me away from its nest
blowing leaves  tempt the old cat,  but not enough
ancient mountains...  runners clearing hurdles  on the practice field
thanksgiving  fifteen minutes of mince pie
blossoms... the baby's bare feet  pedal the air
butterfly my attention  attention span
one moth  a thousand candles  light the darkness
trail's end my pebble settles the cairn
family reunion  some of the beached kelp  in knots
a jar of pennies  on the lemonade stand evening cool
lightning...  the scarecrow's coat sleave caught in mid-wave
summer's end  the hammock turned in on itself
charcoal alley  children flick marbles  into the light
season of lights  the postman leans to the wind
having no thought we've come to see them  dogwoods in bloom
turning tide  placing intact clams  back in the water
mallard pair  he rocks  on her wake
filtering in  with the night air  a skunk's warning
stone in my pocket  the brook cuts deeper into the mountain
a bee chose the rose i meant to pluck...  empty vase
soba noodles... the new year  slips in
hazy dusk...  no one bothered to plow the graveyard road
child's wake  the weight  of rain
gunshot the length of the lake
a stick caught  on the lip of the dam winter's end
summer stars... the old violin goes to the highest bidder
winter drags on...  i squeeze the last drops  from a teabag
distant thunder a titmouse gives one chirp  and falls silent
alzheimer's birthday  each slice of the cake  takes part of her name
march winds a decade has passd  by your grave
indian summer a spent salmon  washes ashore
after the funeral whiskers still  in his razor
the page-finders  of my father's daily missal losing their colors
first buds of spring  i change the washer's setting to delicate
among the gravestones with names worn away  children play hide 'n seek
whalebone from a beach near savoonga  winter rain
all saints morning  a path  of trodden leaves
cremated  in her favorite kimono  small green plums
spring rain the gravedigger latches the door  of his backhoe
spring rain the cat's pink nipples
loon calls  my daughter drawing circles near the fire
summer evening  from across the meadow  a call to supper
shivering on the roof i rub my palms together meteor shower
ocean breeze  a strand of seaweed steadies the kite
autumn rose even as i sketch the wind more petals fall
humid july  from the stove the smell  of old fires
the wind of autumn  a homeless man warms himself  hand to mouth
broken easel  the front yard blue with wildflowers
heat waves  the hitchhiker shifts her child to the other hip
land's end  sand in each bite of my apple
indian summer a fish slips through  the gill net
her 18th birthday for the first time she notices  my silences
spring sunshine the climbing ivy  filled with sparrows
meteor shower a gentle wave wets our sandals
mountain hike we drink from the beginning of a great river
spring sun  high in his arms  the newborn is shown
snail to know its heart beats too
lethal injection  unable to shut  the blind dog's eyes
end of summer the shape of his feet in his sneakers
geronimo's grave  someone has left  plastic flowers
new in town the scent of unknown flowers
foghorns... we lower a kayak  into the sound
catalog time  the garden begins without a seed
new buterfly... folded wings  lean into the wind
morning overcast  a few seeds still dangle  from the dandelion
break up  i leave behind  her butterfly net
walking home barefoot,  we enter the shadow of the hill
autumn evening... a page of the old book  separates from the spine
funeral procession... snowflakes blowing  into the headlights
autumn evening  my hospital window  becomes a mirror
storm clouds  the cry of a shearwater circles the sky
late into the night we talk of revelations  moon through the pines
the kettle whistles...  a blur of garden color  on the window
winter beach  a piece of driftwood  charred at one end
riveredge old growth: a towering window of stars
i'm caught in it too  the blossom-loosening wind
over the railroad tracks  the slow motion of a snake
the beetle i righted  flies straight into a cobweb
leaf in my palm its stem extends  my lifeline
about the tree  over my small son's grave tell me
musty smell forgotten...deep  into the text
that venus! leading the cupped moon through every turn of the road
"grabs" and "opens" the fist  sowing seeds
the river coming to it with nothing in my hands
deep silence  the orphaned nestlings  this third morning
summer solstice the long tips of lavender bent by bees
snowbound coloring inside the lines
the dumproad pond tadpoles exit a birdhouse
still sun-warmed... the pulled-out scarecrow  in my arms
changing the swallowtail  changed by it the spring wind
letting the branch go a shower of petals falls  on the old woman
toll booth lit for christmas  from my hand to hers  warm change
winter seclusion  tending all day the small fire
on the path only one of us  touched by a falling leaf
winter, bedtime static flickers through a white sleeve
warm river  up to our necks in sunset
beneath the ice the waterfall still falling
old garden chair  sagging with the weight of a single leaf.
after the stroke... watching only the half of your face that smiles
city window mountains and pines etched in frost
autumn deepens  an empty snail shell  explored by an ant
early morning sun scattered on the table  several grains of salt
snowflakes  no one will miss  melt in her hand
bright leaves blow through  her dream house
scattering his ashes  the moon  in bits and pieces
on the river  of many names, one cloud  floating
learning too late he didn't like bubinga wood sun strikes the urn
the war memorial  migrating butterflies cover the names
falling leaves  the house comes out of the wood
leaving you fog on either side  of the white heron
below zero  all curled up in the woodpile the skin of a snake
deep winter the armload of firewood chills the kitchen
mourning dove calls...  my elderly neighbor stills  the sound of her hoeing
august morning  a window washer wiping dust from his sunglasses
snowmelt... she enters  the earth on her knees
an old woolen sweater taken yarn by yarn  from the snowbank
a white horse drinks from the acequia blossoming locust
sunlight shines red through my father's thumb on the steering wheel
two women crying  one giving birth  the other being born
approaching the family plot...  my furled umbrella  turns into a cane.
chernobyl victim  fingers pressing the plastic  to his wife's caress
cloud shadow  long enough to close  the poppies
the thick clang of a cowbell  the sun deepens
roses in the smaller room more fragrant
ninety winters  spellbound  again
silent cathedral  stained-glass apostles  dimming with dusk
up the path to touch that one oak in last night's dream
dry leaves  the old archer  curves his eyebrow
soft rain the new grave looks old
morning sneeze  the guitar in the corner  resonates
dusk  a lone car going the same way as the river
first days of summer... already the leaves gather beneath the sycamores
fall leaves the trees the winter sky
so many ways  within the waterfall  for water to fall
after the rain  on my vegetable patch a new crop of stones
frozen in mud by the vacant shanty: lottery ticket
the potter's hands  gently shape the vase out of himself
watermelon rind,  sitting in its own juice  the summer sun
figure drawing class  in the model's deepest shadows  a stark white string
ebb tide... a little sea  in the shell
watching rain pouring down...pouring down just watching
abandoned store large sign reading  we never close
a single strand of spider silk  stops her
endlessly becoming, clouds
mime  lifting fog
taking time...  listening to the grocery clerk
in the yukon  sleeping with one eye shut  the summer night
in soap bubbles again and again his face is broken
yard sale,  sunlight filling  mason jars
leaving home... the smell of smoke  from old brick chimneys
frozen pond white antlers rise  through the ice
june night  my mother alone with  her cancer
at dinner biting into roast beef... the butcher's thumb nail
phoning the neighbors their real voices through the open window
repeating the lecture his eyes following  the window-cleaner's blade
tools rusting unused on the work bench  a faucet dripping
full moon   peering into  the half-built house
dusk  drawing the pond's depth  to the surface
old woman, wrapping her cat's gifts centering the bows
on the way to work  a hot air balloon up in the mist
this heat;  the dog's tail  the only breeze
light up under the gull's wing: sunrise
second husband  painting the fence  the same green
such coolness the snail stretches its neck
the one legged bird that deep bend before taking off
bird song lost  in bird song
walking in on her dead eyes reflecting  snowfall
in the sea  the fireworks rising
bird feeder untouched...    alone again
circling each thigh cool  of the night river
small child afraid to throw away  his church bulletin
in utter stillness  the incense changes direction
early spring sun  the spinster combs out her hair for nesting birds
canyon: at the very edge  riversound
out of its slipper  her bare foot talking under the table
burial prayers  grandson playing hide and seek  behind the stones
between the fireflies the changing shape of darkness
my father's hammer  warm again  in my hand
under trees and sky the baby studies  her hands
migrating geese once there was so much  to say
sound of her voice  carrying eggs across the ice
moving  with the clock tower's shadow the flower lady
heart drawn in dust by the old indian...  rain
whispered dusk  a fox picks its way across the ice
mist  lifting the loon's cry
snowman's eye sinking in  the spring rain
autumn afternoon: i stand on the shadow of the sparrow
ten below zero: man and boy walk through their breath to read old tombstones
hot wind  the roadrunner's beak opens and closes
blackbirds descend  through the floaters  in this eye
the old man closes the shadow in his hand
spring drizzle  rounding the thorn  a drop of light
horizon wild swan drifting through  the woman's body
deserted wharf  the mine bows to the moon
a spider's web  across the windharp the silence
under the back steps  catfish still flop in the pail  the long august night
horns fold  at my shadow's touch; brown slug
early april rain  that woman fills every jar, seals them forever
dead mynah bird...  with each passing car its wing flaps
picking cotton  the memory  of birdtracks in the snow
old tea bag;  tints the moon  slightly
blackened walnut  left unopened winter solstice
distant woodchopper inside the cabin  axbite echoes
the grey cranes at dusk bending in a line along the crooked fenceposts
checking for water  the woman finds a full moon trapped in the cistern
old woman,  rain in the eye of her needle
the path shorter now, underfoot the crumbling leaves; the child runs ahead
cry of the peacock widens the crack in the adobe wall
fields of snow  not only moonlight  but the moon
cold morning sea  an old man towels himself in the sunlight
fields of corn stretching as far as the eye can see within             a lost child
crossing the bright sky of a near-sighted swimmer,  the song of a bird
and yet perishable is flesh a mountain plum
what thing cries out  deep inside us  cooking the turtle?
lights out  ...the firefly  inside
the wind  somewhere else  bird tracks in a light snow
apples cooking: in the aroma  pictures of my mother canning
dawn  another parting with the moon
back and forth goldfish hot & humid afternoon
the child points at the moon  and says, "bird"
one seagull on a shaft of air;  dawn
lean man  carving the tree's dream.
morning-glory folds into herself into her folds
from behind me  the shadow of the ticket-taker  comes down the aisle
walking to work   pages lap at your feet  the quick eye holds up the news to the day
part of a dog walking by upside down  in the roadside puddle
where the ripple was  the fisherman casts his line; another ripple
quiet strokes of night swimmer: the slap  of beaver tails...
never expecting the lilies in november  nor the small coffin
the room's smallness  fills with light  this morning of snow
the way of the conch  blueing in the sea, and echoing in the wind
leaving    all the morning glories    closed
old frog  up to his ears  in moonlight
reaching into sky the girl breaks the wish  bone of geese
in a dark bag onions  sprouting
still lake  a hawk makes off  with its image
skiers! standing  on the wind
pregnancy shape of the dark side  of the crescent moon
spring sky  a seagull enters  our selfie
evening lull  a seaside cave exhaling butterflies
first glimpse of her mastectomy bra winter rose
silence leaves are falling  all by themselves
the snow-spinning wind  i dream of only big trees in my prison yard
after the sunset  a white chrysanthemum lights quite alone
summer night  a worm bites through the silence  in a fallen acorn
the shadow of the fish  hides in the shadow of a leaf
shining in a drop of dew  all his love
waiting in the sheaths of ice blades of grass
places i'll never see the backlit wings of migrating geese
reflection  in this oyster shell  pearl moon
spring shower a peacock sips pinkness from the bromliad
mouth of the river  i dream with my cousin  boat to boat
empty jam jar the tadpoles  in the u-bend
no clouds a wind in the sheoaks shuffles bits of blue
loon call     the stillness of the lake
flashes of lightning  across the pasture -- sheared sheep
half light  not knowing what today  will bring
winter commute  the face of a missing child exits
over the eggs they laid too soon  late falling snow
sun's out a drop on the lily pad  changes to green
the faint melody  of a carousel swirling leaves
winter's end  fence wire ripples  in the wake of a coot
sacred ground red geraniums where they fell
winter garden my father's swing seat  still creaking
dawn grey the scratch of a claw from the sleeping dog
on the pine a feather stiff with sleet  ice moon
dusk shadows  a peacock's cry across the paddocks
spring birdsong a common cuckoo barges in
gale-force wind a bird's nest becomes what it was
wind in tamaracks whispering to shadows,  shadows
drawing the geese from the stubble fields the pink-tinged sky
funeral march the crunch crunch crunch  of cicada husks
on the piano  photos of the ones  who don't visit
april showers my inside-out umbrella  drowns a snail
november dusk a cloud of sparrows rounds  the weathered silo
end of summer the busker's trouser cuffs  collect burs
twilight  the late swallow passes the first bat
stone steps an electric ant takes the handrail
spring equinox  chaise lounge claimed by the swollen river
turning tide  the buoy bobs sideways
the windfalls he gathered gathering dusk
november rain the fence around the ruin
early dusk  the elderly sexton  wreathed in mist
storm on the lough  streetlamps on seaview  lit by sunrise
laid at the feet  of a cat, all the alps
first snow... filling the emptiness of a curled leaf
equinox again you speak of leaving
wild persimmon  autumn sun fills  the last leaf
island morning fog  the spruce tree and wooden bench  web-conected
chill wind  the windowsill tomato still warm
new year's snow the tracks of creatures that went by in the night
mountain sunset an eagle rides  the downslope wind
crossroads  the wind takes my hair  the other way
new moon  the night watchman  goes unseen
in the chair  the cat curls up  in my warmth
where the maple stood a shroud  of sunlight
the things  we never did  undertow
winter solstice the barbed wire fence furry with frost
year end  a boat accompanies  the river to the sea
november sunset a galaxy of crows quench the twilight
receding surf...  for every clamshell a sandy wake
some in, some out of the ebbing tide... the morning oystercatchers
september wind  a better view of compost bins
stooping on the edge  of autumn purple river grass
country fair  cornsilk at the feet  of the hucksters
spring equinox  two pines leaning into each other
end of a stalk  the caterpillar climbs  a ladder of air
sun fringed clouds  a carrion crow struts from sleeper to sleeper
horses stand in morning frost one apart stares  at the space between
mountain stillness  an empty chrysalis  fills with sunlight
summer morning  every other post  has its crow
early frost the fragrance of pine on fire
cold rain...  the fishermen wade deeper into the lake
winter chill  a bull ant climbs the flame tree
autumn breeze spider's web  convex... concave
the open gate to an empty field country graveyard
christmas eve swaddled in the busker's case a fiddle
full flower moon  a soft-shelled crab emerges from itself
dry season  each cowherd's song to the well
birdsong before dawn  all the lives i've lived
moonflower  the baby's hand closes around air
freezing rain beading on the blackbird's back
hot wind  a pine cone waddles to the pond
morning after all my empties  full of sun
milky way the light from one farm stretches down the valley
new moon  changing the photo  inside her heart locket
asylum window a woman scrapes the ice flowers
so cold those winter stars  so close
something adrift  beyond the break  gibbous moon
snowdrop stems  a little longer today the warming sun
this long drought tumbleweeds still tumbling
stacking stones for a garden wall the weight of their age
one by one  summer raindrops  darken the pavement
summer rain each corner drips to its own tempo
her texted outrage  sent  with a well placed tap
reincarnation lecture i could see her dress in a quilt
her fingers move  as if counting... dusk light
spring equinox  the clack of marbles
closing day vine tomatoes warm my hands
answering a question  with a question hermit thrush
new carnival  the fortune teller  asks the way
lake trout rising to fire flies among the stars
circle of leaves  the dog finally catches his tail
a black split down the boulder's center ...end of winter
abandoned trailer lot first snow  covers the television set
an ocean  between us  ripe mulberries again
yard sale the empty fishbowl  still wet
cloud light the cows turned out in the harvested field
evening snow  the dark turns  lighter
the youngest  so far from home  evening star
bulldozer a yellow caterpillar  in its tracks
receding thunder... one bullfrog  then another
daybreak  between mist and pond a loon's wake
autumn rain on the headstone  his name darkens
spider silk broken starlight  between pines
christmas hymns the lady beside him robustly tone deaf
crack of thunder  a vee of geese  breaks
sweet pea vines the skilled hands of my wife
plum blossoms falling...  her fingers lift  from the braille
crescent moon...  a horseshoe crab  returns to the sea
mom's old farm  the gentle curve  of the earth
airing the house  i hear the men far away tilling fields
sweltering heat a black and yellow field spider bundles a grasshopper
deserted church the yew's shadow moves  in a pew
another spring  his bottle of after shave still on the shelf
wood's edge stepping inside the sound of the river
rising sun  the sunflowers' dark heads
youngest daughter passing through the willow shoots
vernal pool the hardy lily cradles  a young sun
birdsong  a shovel leans  in the snow
smoker's lounge everyone leaves behind  a bit of ash
lifting fog the cormorant on his rock
sunlit steps  a church elder prods  the sleeping dog
midday heat milk cows chew their cuds under the oak trees
morning moon  the soap bar floating just barely there
day moon  the girls next door spin hula hoops
the surrounding city... slate headstones tilted every which way
overgrown thicket the intersection  of old stone walls
first spring day  the same little nest  of faded twigs
a wave  passing waves full moon
chasing pigeons a little girl releases  her father's hand
the stone cutter's yard polished granite blocks reflect a blossoming peach
the pallbearers last year's acorns  crunch underfoot
mountain rain the rising magpie's bloodied bill
killing frost all day a steady rain of yellow leaves
divorce day no more staples in our gun
metal roof  the alternating feet  of a magpie
summer's end... a float and line dangle from the pine
sudden shower the steel underbelly  of a bridge
winter sunset their argument's  long shadows
road work three crows study a pavement reflector
blowing through the holes of the nomad's flute  autumn wind
missing face  of the snowman  pleiades
back-to-back blizzards  under one of those mounds a stone buddha
the colour  of the hill pioneer graves
snow-viewing  with a stranger the silence between us
old cat catching birds  with her eyes
early autumn  under the old pear tree scent of brandy
spring cleaning just ahead of the broom a long legged spider
lavender stalk  the weight of one butterfly
adrift  in an old rowboat i follow the moon
stillness one cicada  across the lake
a pale moth clings to the screen  september rain
old cemetary  the broken iron gate  never closed
a solitary walk among stubbled fields the first star
always a few steps  ahead of me grasshopper
groundhog day six more springs until  my social security
after the rain  each leaf has caught  a bit of sky
my closet it keeps so many  of my single socks
falling asleep  the rythmn of her breath  on my forearm
sunlit clouds snow in every crack of stone buddha
morning fog joining our gardens the scent of lavender
winter stars  a faint snore from the bedroom
raindrops on the leaves of sunflower  po-tan, po-tan
pleasantly drunk... fireflies come out  of the moon
study window  still missing the green spider  that lived in it
fluttering  in the spider's web a butterfly wing
left out overnight  the child's cup filled up with snow
in the shoebox  photos  from a different life
neighbour's cat the cicada in its teeth keeps singing
quiet pier  the milky way spills  into the sea
shorter days  the wind carries  butterflies
morning fog the muffled sound of the train
late autumn a tea leaf in my cup  opens up
only a junco's wing this small snow-blizzard  from the lilac
moment of rest  wind  and scarecrow
morning sun the first red maple
early thaw  last year's potatoes  sprout in the hutch
winter evening  the house cat sinks its teeth deeper into me
carrying the harvest  rhythm  of her hips
a buzzing bumble bee  dandelion fluff covers  the ripe blackberry
frigid night  a drip in the sink  fills the whole house
cool morning  a caterpillar asleep  under buddha's ear
lakeside  the irises find their color at dusk
traveling exhibit a spider in the bonsai tree
lovers looking up not kissing spring moon
house for sale  the pear tree in blossom  we make an offer
harvest moon  the horizon between here  and hereafter
heart failure folding the sails before nightfall
november darkness only the tick of the engine cooling
morning sun a lone crow scatters  frost from the pine
noon  a quiet bell  reflects the sun
her new wig the fir trees shed their snow
enamelled top my son's smile spins  around the floor
sun-dried grasses quietly, the sparrows whirr as i pass
almost dawn a heron fluffs the stillness  into itself
bushfire smoke... yachts on the lagoon  have no masts
heavy surf  too many moons  to count
carrying sunlight the wings of a dragonfly
a calf born today lies still  as a burlap bag
collecting... for the dead miners wild violets
aftershock  across the tiles  peppercorns roll
a moment before sunrise ice singing beneath the swans' feet
3 a.m.  the obverhead fan clicks clicks clicks
he leaves in an ambulance the chrysanthmum buds closed tight
a field in bloom  the foal's tracks follow the mare's
his father's death... shadows of raindrops  on the window ledge
fallen leaf the stream carrying another silence
liquidambar already my toddler's hair darkening
full moon at motuhoa  stingrays cloud the evening tide
soft mist...  a mother cups her baby's head
half light  the river scarred by a heron
summer flood  my father wades through the stars
moonlight the stream flows from shadow  to shadow
day moon  hoof prints litter  the beach track
putting on  her faded levi's  the undertaker
weather change  the first child meets her sister
leaving your home kowhai flowers  flick off my windscreen
twilight  a tui mimics  a tui
friend's funeral  a stranger uses her teapot
low tide  exploring the rock pools  a green plastic fish
bring 'n buy  my wife swaps life stories
arriving home on census night so many stars
conversion  the sun falls between goalposts
one toheroa over the limit  low winter moon
beside the  'high fire risk' sign a blaze of montbretias
sleeping horse  angled bones lean into the summer sun
alcatraz manacles of kelp
quince blossoms he stops  the chemo
alone now no ruby slippers  to take me home
thousands of feet of darkness above us sleeping swifts
lullaby meteorites flash  beneath heavy lids
tall grass a hand drowning in snow waves
midsummer under a leaf  hidden from
alphabet soup i practice cradling love  in a stainless spoon
sauteed fiddleheads dinner begins with grace
overnight the spider's mathematics
nightfall no decision required
nautical chart  i touch the depth of my mother's ashes
slave quarters... the shapes of their shadows in this dust
shades of blue... the deer's remaining eye  cradled by bone
winter dusk my grief released from the crow's throat
formation of geese  a log opens to the woodsman's maul
i seem to be  an intermittent shadow... summer clouds
bitter wind the towhee's song three notes short
falling leaves  the clang of horseshoes in the crisp air
spattering rain the pulse in a sparrow's throat
weathered rail  all those carved names  through my hand
mice  beneath the floorboards...  all her small noises
daybreak  the scent of crushed sweetgrass where deer have lain
the timbre  of a horse's heart  winter sea
trying to name  the color of the sun  yellow peony
mayflies  an unfinished painting  on the easel
opening the door  to an unexpected knock  the fragrance of plum
a box turtle  slowly unpacks its legs first warm day
so few feathers left  it barely has a name  the melting snow
caravaggios a passing cloud darkens the skylit room
autumn wind he wills his body to science
drive-in movie  the car surrounded  by fireflies
woodsmoke the last long weekend of the summer
spring floods i move the sink spider  to a safer spot
adult walk  a skip  in the child's step
a sudden tinkling of the wind bell  winter stars
a redstone church still echoing its angelus,  the red stone hills
square little windows the laughter of women at work inside
near sunbathers driftwood nearly bleached
her therapy the basket  unwoven
man in the moon a newsman reports a beheading
letting go  the heart of a sparrow
cog railway white sky becomes snowflakes
daffodils a laughing girl with rain in her shoe
wide open the roses we leave  on the motel dresser
lantern shadows two-teat harmony  in the milk pail
sparse shadow of the plum tree  the pull of an old friend
hot night at the filling station  songs of love
shop window winter light along  the violin strings
childhood home  i park in the shade of my cherry stone
the school bell rings...  the wings of a butterfly tremble  on the pin
followed home by a dog i don't know autumn dusk
blizzard day  extra brown sugar on my oatmeal
in the gutter a crumpled scratch card ragweed in bloom
gathering dusk  fragments of sky between limbs  become one
solar eclipse the rare silence  of seagulls
family secrets  a thicket full  of ripe raspberries
plum blossoms i make plans  for my ashes
the piano hammers barely moving...  night snow
dusklight i read her poem differently
first snow  my child's footprints no longer fit inside of mine
late winter...  a king snake stretches  across the road
evening news  the soothing weight of the quilt
snow flurries the square dancers  do-si-do
sunglints off falling snow  the silent no in her smile
wild berries  one training wheel lifts  round the curve
winter light  she holds the teacup  with both hands
orion rising  she reaches to loosen the pup's collar
spring stars  washing my daughter's lipstick  off the mirror
still arguing we swim the same river  further upstream
winter rain finding that part of silence  which speaks to me
autumn woods  yesterday's walking stick just where i left it
late for work one empty space petaled in wisteria
frozen eyes of the just netted fish winter rainbow
the foul ball lands in an empty seat  summer's end
rainy day...  a crow on the bare branch sharpens his beak
hide and seek among the hollyhocks  august moon
winter solitude the lima beans soaking  in half-moonlight
first light dark limbs of the walnut  holding their snow
rumors of war up into a darkening sky a child's newsprint kite
summer meadow a blade of grass  becomes a whistle
deep night... a moth stirs  the windchime
steady snowfall...  i make hot chocolate  grandmother's way
quiet night the watchman bends  to touch a rose
gentle rain a shimmer of pennies  beneath the koi
tree-lined stream the falcon rowing through air
holding the warmth  of the afternoon sun  dandelion ridge
simmering rhubarb mother plays ragtime  on broken keys
moonrise  a flow of shadows along the river
bare hills  the horizon looped  between post and wire
spilling  from the sound of thunder a raindrop
dipped oar  phosphorescence trails the moon
summer storm  the windscreen wipers slice our silence
ocean floor the ribs and backbone of the fishing boat
kitchen window  sunlight pools in last night's dishes
dry floodplain  a billabong holds the last light
first love  windmills turning into dusk
hawk in flight  recycling the wind  into himself
coastal caf she suckles in the shade of mum's cowboy hat
spring again  birth-marks on the snow gums
a maple leaf  touching other leaves before the ground
he turns  his beach towel to face mecca
temple gate looking for the priest  in winter mist
prison cell visiting briefly  the easter moon
breastfeeding the slow drip of rain on the nursery roof
misty rain  a footprint on moss fades
rusted hinge  the butterfly's wings close, open...
may sunset  dandelions surround the bulging udder
shortening days golden foliage holds  the sunlight
the coming storm  a cricket has hold  of the chevrolet
red dust road a cattle truck reaches  the vanishing point
clickety-clack  over the old wooden bridge  loose teeth and small change
clear water a magpie's song drops into the pond
the cockatoo sidles towards me    small in its dark eye
village debris  photos of the dead  float face up
by the creek  wrens echo the rippling over stones
bitter cold out-of-work husband burning things
autumn rain his name on the stone darkens
bush cemetery a child's grave beneath an evergreen
late walk beach and moon  the same curve
back from the war the tap he couldn't fix still dripping
red dawn  the fisherman's hands gutting the mullet
dust storm  the red kelpie  blending in
wide water... flight of an osprey shapes the evening light
new year  explosions of fireworks how constant the stars
retirement  an op-shop dummy  wears my suit
wind in the park  picnic plates frisbee to other blankets
storm crosses the traveller's shadow  he marches on
day after christmas all the fathers returning their children
retirement home my long-johns on the line still jogging
distant thunder each stroke of the oar  stirs the clouds
old dog keeping active  in her dreams
train nap leaning back  into a conversation
fishing before dawn morning star caught on the line escapes with the tide
sea spray drifting up the cliff face  flannel flowers
landfill  yesterday's headlines still sinking in
scenic drive  i'm interrrupted  by her snores
crickets  extinguishing day
spring petals leaving it to the breeze  to brush them off the page
twilight  his breath warm as he fastens my zip
shrine under the she-oak  buddha's fingers  touch the leaf litter
all night snow  the cat burrows deep  into my dream
river sunset  cranes wade through crimson clouds
the river how soon our thoughts turn again  to war
spring dawn pine needles dripping the night away
summer storm  shorter than  my cup of tea
summer afternoon  our shadows touch before we do
among the headstones  one small pine  bends with the wind
out of the river the silence  of posts
doorbell  my thoughts dress up
rain fills the dam  overflowing the night with bull frogs' chorus
winter nap  startled awake  by the sudden dark
lorikeet lands  on camellia branch  petal shower
boat harbour  an old fisherman moored by his handline
bushfire season from dry leaves the crackle of lizards
half caught in a dish of stars  rising moon
rowing me upstream  the steady breathing  of wood through water
winter rain the blind boy on the train  calls out the stations
day moon  the odour of walnuts  on our breath
overtaken, i ride in the slip-stream  of your after-shave
child chasing nothings with butterfly net catching them
sleeping cat  belly full of purrs
noon light  the stillness of fish in a heron's eye
convalescing... the window takes 2 hours  to cross the carpet
closing down sale caught by moonlight the naked dummy
forklift  a bin of oranges  catching sunlight
so lonely the river snag  without its cormorant
chiaroscuro the white cat in deep shade curls deeper in
early spring  a feather blows in  the cat door
falls overlook  thinking of having  my ashes scattered
in its shade  remembering the summer  i planted this willow
squabbling  a flock of lorikeets  louder than the neighbours
filtered sunlight a butterfly's nap on my arm
blackbird song  my sumi-e bamboo grows  beyond the sheet
mid-puddle  the toddler discovers his superpower
parkinson's with care he pencils in his wife's eyebrows
it could be nothing it could be something winter darkness
father's day... the weight of his hammer  that never fit my hand
ground fog  i am certain  of nothing
sinking moon  the weight of all my unspoken words
holly trees surround  the garden  when will i learn to forgive?
dog days  through every window  the night train's whistle
sketching the sapling i will never see grown  the quiet woods
perseids... oh, the weight  of all those wishes
equinox this one tiny worm  coiling uncoiling
deep crack in the acorn morning thunder
frost-tipped blossoms not how i thought it would happen
white lilacs  beyond our grasp  the milky way
snow clouds each of us seeing someone else
afternoon fog the dampened cries  of wild geese
unrelenting summer  a termite tears at its wings
fallout she said it felt lighter  than snow
bristlecone pine  finding out about myself
at least the crow says what he means  april rain
acacia seeds rattle in the autumn breeze... missing you
snowed in every inch of her
blue on blue  a dragonfly taps  the skylight
the shell's story inside the inside
clouded moon  the ocean moves closer
in an open jar  of sage, the desert after the rain
traveling the creek that bears her name my mother's ashes
ripening plums  outside our bedroom window  ...and the far dawn
heat wave mouse circling the bottom of the rain barrel
full moon white-barked alder leans its light  back into sky
late summer eve white coals on the lid  of a dutch oven
fall garden the cat's ashes no more than a handful
christmas morning the snowprints of the stray who curled by our door
white towels  by a wash basin jane doe
three-quarter moon  mandolin music  just sad enough
milky sky an eagle's rib bones  cradle the snow
expectant father  the tender way he holds his comic book
first robin the bowed sapling flings its ice
summer heat brooding in the dark  bantam hen
funeral march the play of raindrops on mahogany
closed louvers  a mourning dove filters through
shrinking snowman the red wool scarf  loosens its grip
crows on phone lines  a new arrangement every few caws
sun dogs  on the winter horizon...  another body count
midwinter sermon  hardened drops of varnish on the pews
hurricane the taste of rain from a barrel
winter light  chickens scratch at their pale shadows
sea turtle  one thousand miles  his eye on a star
sculpture garden  a spider web deep in cleavage
mountain pass headlights on the edge  of a thunderhead
the faint pulse of out-of-tune strings  winter light
baton raised... a moth spirals  into the silence
jar of tadpoles two shadows swim off  the candle-lit table
summer wind...  sailing the length  of the moon's reflection
precipice the ascending cry of an osprey
a banner flaps  in the autumn wind... everything must go!
winter fog  everything familiar unfamiliar
the sound of breaking waves on a moonless night distant friend
slow bend in the river  he comes around to my point of view
hot night the length of a siren
dislodged from its tangle of branches beaver moon
among her things  my birthday newspaper deepening snow
salmon thrashing  near the base of their ladder we stop holding hands
bus stop  a pregnant woman picks  at flaking paint
family reunion  the wind takes a paper plate  into the lilacs
deer emerge from the snowy woods  tea grown cold
traveling, too, on a seat by the window green melons
sugar moon rising the wail of a midnight train  takes me home again
church memorial celebrating her long life creak of grasshopper
open cellar door  faint voice of a grasshopper  lulls baby to sleep
tales of our wildness sets off cycles of laughter clinking iced coffee
first sun barely up the clatter of black-eyed peas  poured into a pot
new yar's reunion once again grandfather gets the coin in the cake
from the bare hilltop,  watching migrating raptors. how far will they go?
sharing a silence under tonight's sugar moon  the old dog and i
from a stiff clothesline  black long underwear flapping;  amish washing day
decades in l.a. the baggage i still carry...  longjohns in my drawer
drinking iced coffee  i check the yes box to be an organ donor
first sun of the year a street workman disappears into a manhole
through the bay window  a sugar moon pours itself into jelly jars
frost-covered window  i add a rubber ducky  to the buddle bath
under the table my knee touches my grandson's the lengthening days
restless autumn sea remnants of fukushima arrive at our shores
your share of our life  fits neatly into boxes... sky swallows return
making bean soup for  my old mother and humming the songs she once hummed
reaching summer's end a newspaper boat sets sail  for the horizon
rising harvest moon a tractor's headlights heading  down a distant road
spattered and faded his index card recipe of navy bean soup
year of the dragon  my future mother-in-law slips me her room key
an eighth grader's voice  changes during announcements  these lengthening days
with lengthening days the sound of the dog's toenails on a hardwood floor
the familiar cough  of the neighbor's old chevy winter solitude
munitions worker  staggaring home from the pub  dark billowing cloud
persimmon fabric  folded in tissue paper  mother's kimono
finding her letter  in his old leather jacket winter solitude
early morning light gently your hand sweeps away  new year's confetti
the billowing cloud metastasized with lightning chemotherapy
on a dark highway merging with darkening sky  winter solitude
jet contrail blending into a billowing cloud  vet's burial day
winter solitude no spark of recognition in mother's brown eyes
sweeping up new year's  confettianother day of rigamarole
snuffing out candles  just for the joy of their scent winter solitude
we wade our way in  japantown festivities persimmon pudding
fallen persimmon  but i recall the green one  my father gave me
new year's confetti the accordion player  leans back on his heels
galloping a horse right up a hill right into  the billowing clouds
an old pond!  a frog jumps in-  the sound of water.
a beautiful weed  sprouting in the summer sun...  happy, but alone
great japan!  where a bird sings  the lotus sutra
it's 4:10 am  i can't think straight, and much less...  count syllables
bust out pda... what do i see on the screen?  broken lcd!
salty blue water  waving to the sandy shore a roller coaster
a single grain of dust  at the mercy of the wind... the life of a man
the old hand  swats a fly already gone
here so late at work. must not abandon kevin. tired unity!
short summer night. a dewdrop on the back of a hairy caterpillar.
do caterpillars think butterflies beautiful?  find your own cocoon
flowers bloom and die wind brings butterflies or snow a stone won't notice
gamer's eyes light up but, alas, he soon finds out  there's another stage
house of grass widow's- only in the neighborhood  roosters cry the dawn
worker bees can leave even drones can fly away  the queen is their slave
evening snow falling, a pair of mandarin ducks  on an ancient lake.
corner spider rest easy, my soot-broom  is idle
in a new bucket the same water... looks so fresh!
absorbing the warmth, reflecting the summer's light:  chenresig statue.
night comes with a chill  the party's over for now  until the next time...
moon behind the clouds -  the mother nursing  the twins in deepest darkness
lotus leaves in the pond  ride on water.  rain in june.
warm, calm summer night can't see the whole monitor...  kitty's limp, bent paw
roses of pure white scenting the warm summer air  a sweet confection
tunnel through the fog- the dying man's wide open eyes  seek for a icon
without just one nest a bird can call the world home  life is your career
even wild roses of a downtrodden land reach enlightenment
looking, looking  at the mandarin orange... year's first calligraphy
the distant mountain  reflected in his eyes...  dragonfly
a hot night's pilgrimage  with song...  zenko temple
gathering storm clouds  blanket the grey horizon  now walk into them
blue car on the street  didn't see the leaveless twig
serving me all day, constantly rubbing my hand: my spiral notebook.
suddenly, a light at the end of the tunnel: the moon in the sky
a hole in the clouds- the sun has  send its light to  a cherry in blossom
tiny crystals melt  shimmering in the spring sun  natures transition
so why the plunder, this is our only home,  worship the planet.
perhaps time is spent better when working on  your own web site. ha!
mountain song wind blows  natures music
my cat queen  motion poet velvet pads
a mother nursing- here's the white line of life twining this hearthes
hanging on the rope-  lost among the old clothes  the moon's kimono
sweat pours down my face. fifty hours and counting. still more work to do...
hunted by the cat with unparalleled vigor:  tiny little ant!
ideas may run out then i will have naught to write  string together words
eighteen holes ahead  the ground is covered in leaves great things are to come
not the shadow of a ghost...  only a pedigree dog look for its master
skiing down the mountain  'cause of the fog, i can't see  where the path is smooth
thick rain drops splash down... students scurry with their stuff  as august closes.
two years of mourning vanish  a playful kitten
hazy, tired head  remnants of the night before  summer-autumn air
together we sleep surrounded by things that don't the campfire keeps watch
sparrow parents too bring their children... zenko temple
if people ask and dewdrops answer is the lesson learned?
breathing virgo air,  laying sprawled across the bed... night shuts his mind off.
long winter days and nights sleepless nights ahead  newborn baby cries.
life is so boring but one will have to live it    either me or you
snow rain snow rain snow  i forgot the construction buffalo weather
haiku can be fun  but it can take much work like coding java
as autumn descends  one man is unaffected:  he's called "mega man"
the old, dying tree doesn't care what the leaves think... they will come again
like a waterfall, the yang breath just pushes on... even in autumn!
men's mouths gossip just like a woman's just shorter words
walk like a goddess...  but remember that my foot cannot see you there.
basho's death-day
apple blossom pink  opening unto the world  peaceful is the view
delicate sweet flower growing with the wind soft summer breeze
do you still feel birds and squirrels on your limbs...  sleeping, leaveless tree?
flowers in autumn:  like a mother too well dressed  for the occasion
awakened again, the first work day of the year... sleeping white kitty
winter morning traffic  on a car window a girl draws a garden
this twilight moment... hope in the covering of a persimmon sky
reading suzuki, my mind grows hot, like the air...  all my haikus suck!
hot, he's on his back...  how do i look upside down,  little black kitty?
morning energy, only early do i strive. day fades. life drains. sleep.
summer is over  but fall has not yet begun... custodial sounds
young soldiers  a field of ripened wheat  bends in autumn wind
preschool the lower panes rubbed frost free
christmas lists slightly to starboard tree stand compromise
sweaty hand on mouse  for a moment i forget i'm not a cleric
when will it become a cricket's nest? my white hair
warrior kneeling  just ten paces from the king  candles see the truth
half-inch piece of chalk  sitting unused in the tray  never used again
a snake curls around  the sound of its hiss high mountain meadow
a new love story: laid on the widow's shoulders wispy bride's veil
alone here, i type  rapbot lives glorious now spits mad crazy shit
dancing in the trees... two primates argue over green destiny sword.
spring departs. birds cry fishes' eyes are filled with tears
ouch! pinch from below. toothy black furry creature thinks not of my size.
laughing bouncy ball  shines bright across the playground rain clouds disappear
unaware the tree  is destined for the axe...  nest building
i am just a man,  a simple and humble man,  a man of colors.
a student arrives,  early like the rest of us...  air conditioned room
ruler of the mac  i think not foolish old man for i have admin privs
an acorn  striking the roof squirrel chatter
ghost of the flame  wreathing around  the now cool wick
they pronounced me dead even though i dance and sing. i am poetry.
deep in my own thoughts,  girl blocks my way off the bus. bump! out of my way.
sometimes when you're mad,  people start to seem smaller. the eyes of the hulk.
window drips grey light frowning children walk to school  early autumn day
light rain starts to fall this half-alive summer day... left ear all plugged up!
some want it snow white others want it to be pitch black  why not make it gray?
opening my hand i return the moth to  the  darkness
a glowworm affixed  on the clown's red shovel-nose: the moon's glowing light
majestic dragons  spread their incandescent wings,  and soar through dark skies
buffalo, denver and yet we're the same people life goes on i guess
our ceremony
cascading water free fall in many degrees a fragrant shower
empty pizza box sitting next to garbage bins... the vacation's end
the rain, then the wind and where the leaves had been
look at the sea shore,  a refuge for the seashells, i love the colors.
i can not believe that the damn gnome does not know what is a sobe?
items from our work are the subject of many poems on this here site.
through the mall i run, firing off my machine gun,  people think im nuts!
snowstorm in the field- from the fear, over the long night, my hair become white
only a lonely song  in the emptiness of night-  the crunch of the snow
to feel nothingness...  in evening when the nightingale became dumb
the snow is falling blanketing the ground in white  will it ever stop
all your base are be- long to us. you are on the  way to destruction.
a stray cat excreting in the winter garden.
a autumn wind more white  than the rocks in the rocky mountain.
the beautiful girl, danced with elegance and grace, it is living art.
amazing nature! summer through a pane glass door... cats at stairs' bottom.
mighty hurricane  doesn't care it's a school day  violent summer
can not i vote more?  i click once, and it goes up  yet, more do nothing
empty the water but do not set off alarm  or the police come.
bottle of purell  brings memories of summer...  chilly air tonight.
at the four way stop  our insistent politeness  annoys each other
underground river blind albino ducks  bob on black ripples
after the northe wind broken in the same drama  lie people and tree
leaving the graveyard...  tens of coffins at the gate waiting for custom
show in the open air: some nightingales' arias  supporting the sky
the bare maple tree...  never would she guess, in death,  she'll be a table
listen to the sound poised on a tender rose the warmth of my tears
for one day smile and mean it.
yummy yummy cake  chocolate cake is superb  now it is all gone
it's burning like fire  it's burning inside of me i can't control it
only trust in death dreams often make fools of us reality kills
lazy saturdays  always avoiding showers i'll clean up sunday
winter snow falling houses covered in white fluff fireplaces glow at night
winter and spring summer with sunlight once again silver autumn moon.
weblogs can be fun  however with no update  they do get old fast
as i sit zazen  the soul of jack kerouac  sits down beside me.
buddha and christ meet  on a cloud high in heaven both needing a rest
can you fall in love  with one look into their eyes?  answers will appear.
one day it's too cool the next day it's far too hot miss california
"come, spring!  come, old man!" the pigeon coos
the air shimmers. whitish flight  of an unknown insect.
being awake he says he is already asleep. autumn chilly night.
i've nothing to do, my hand lives to please you all.  eyes of a kitty.
doom on one machine,  haikus on the other one...  lunch break in summer.
rain stifles the heat,  two more days 'til classes start. the cats will miss me.
a man without love, is a man without a soul,  a man without hope.
worship a woman,  she bares the seeds of all life,  love her forever.
grey noon a lone seagull  flying inland
the door covered  by shade of mulberry tree-  do i open it?
way of traveller- a chicory field reaches the horizon line
stars up in the sky-  next to me on the grassland just a firefly
sun is burning now, burning here and burning there  do you feel the warmth?
i don't understand  i can't reason with it  and i never will
when he stops thinking, he's still breathing, in and out
blankets of white snow  become waves of bold heat as seasons grow old
the earth is shaking  water is rushing ashore there is nothing left
smile hides everyhting  it's deep and shallow it can kill someone
the sun bright  scorched the moon away
run quiet and swift evil senses noise and haste never stop to breathe
a halo of mist  comes over the rising sun:  an autumn morning
a warm summer night,  on my bed i meditate... colors go away.
linux shall rule soon it will overcome gates  but now it still grows
a crystal clear night-  the pearl-diver in the depth  by the naked moon
solar eclipse-  a gaping crowd of people  all watching the sky
it's so much slowly the shadow of the great temple  on a blade of grass
grey group is the best  so are the mint and green group so prize are given
after a big rain, appear a pretty rainbow how nice the skies is
love is lost  snow falls  it's all the same
as the seasons change love is lost  what can be done
i will go on  alone but not friends are with me
bright moon rises dark water shines poor man's paradise
the helicopter  hovers above me m60 shells destroy
old woman alone never creating attachments  life is like a dream
man who looks into life too much  overlooks it
silence eternal a thousand birds beauty supressed by mind
typewriters are great to press the keys, what a joy the ding of the bell.
stripe a golden flash body cuts between green blades  a tail left writhing
all the butterflies flapping their wings inside me. longing to escape.
green moss on the wet roof; springy shimmering soggy  starlings' comfy bed
botton of the heart-  even the dust of grave feels  the homing pigeon
cold. in the first line having  as weapon their innocence,  the young people
hot summer- an ant hid  under a leaf
forever thirsty some people drinking from my cup, i taste the clinking...
lime trees in blossom incensing the monastery-  resurrection's day
light like by day time... the moon happily nestling in yesterday's snow
awake before the alarm clock  listening to pigeons cooing
winding road at dusk  the logger slows down for a deer
the samurai's sword coated in blood of humans samurai fight on
the elegant crane it seems to drift like a dream  seems lighter than air
walking through the woods how it seems so peaceful here surrounded by life
sparkling fall leaves baby panda takes first steps  each day is a gift
struggling conger ant -icipating a view more  likely a pastie
numb, useless, worthless  fading to oblivion  nothingness i breathe
so early for snow the poeple are unprepared disaster follows
as heartbeats hasten  a butterfly emerges...  my glee takes flight too
as heartbeats hasten  a butterfly emerges...  glee takes flight too
unfortunate words can't won't shouldn't didn't  the saddest in life.
churches sit empty, their songs of praise now silenced. time for rocks to sing.
karen waits for me, sitting in her plainview home.  three months til i'm there.
i hear the songbird it is calling to me, but  i am deaf to it.
now the wanderers they follow the lonely path but they are happy
i am spirit and i am soul. i am wonder. i am your true self
woodpecker tapping  on the forest glockenspiel; tympanic oak clunk
high up in the air  upon a carpet of grey clouds... the plane leaves a trail
crabs fallen in love  combing the trees of the moon-  waves after waves
beautiful orchard-  i gather the summer past  from the ripe pears
summer evening- at the window some butterflies  criss-crossing the moon
full moon is rising parishioner's pious prayer  without votive light
the feeling ends  i don't know why  spring returns
my writing flows  as my heart pours my spirit soars free
blades clash against blades arrows pierce sodden armor  and peace was no more
darkness envelops the enemy is unseen yet he walks onward
porcelain toilet  ice cold beer and a corndog i don't miss the sand
the rain pouring down floods his home until he floats.. then a bird eats him
the cricket season  boundaries marked  -  razor-wire  round the clubhouse roof
furious mother  dressed only in a towel  -  giggling from the woods
looking through the glass you can see the sun rise up to greet a new day
leaves waving summer breezes, autumn gales  good-bye. leaves.
warm day spaced head  everyone is talking strange pollen fills my skull.
why are they afraid of that little spider's web broken easily
the world spends millions on ways to entertain us while we sit and starve.
white clover  moth lands -  stalk bends
no mistaking it i must step on the fallen to follow my dream
only a ladybird on a leaf in the sun- the gardian's park
a straw is burning- over there after our death, we shall meet again
a single snowdrop is  rising in the furtive way-  this snow-white triumph in last night in furtive way, this white triumph
after the sunset, the field filled up to sky... chockfull of crickets
under the burden  of its own heavy color, dahlia in bloom
not to die, guilty? fallen soldiers overlook  old men in afghans
back into the fog amidst the red-wood oak trees this; meditation
...in a borrowed coat he has new letters  after his name  -  widower
my brain is a box full of small seagull feathers  ask me a question.
the dalai lama  chants my mind into a dream om can clear my thoughts.
wake up one morning note on the bedside table my girlfriend is gone
cloudy summer day the bees are buzzing loudly a hammock beckons
my chinese sister is more beautiful than jade caught in a sunbeam.
green frog in the road  can't decide it's direction.  look at the dead frog!
turn on your tv.  watch a reality show  where no one is real.
your kiss (and chocolate) my addictions
nature is a girl  an extremely pretty girl  she's really liked
porcelain toilet  ice-cold beer and a corndog i don't miss the sand
i called to the wind, "who's there?... whoever it was still knocks at my gate.
peace eternity freedom love banana       hilarious
orange morning moon hangs above neighbours roof top i fall back to sleep.
black woodburning stove keeps me warm on a cold night thank you to the tree.
dreaming in the night i awake thinking of you echoes from my soul.
blackberries shrivel  spider webs stick in hair
dead grey cement chunk  crumbled from the ha-ha wall  whitewashed by swallows
bent leafy arrow  of ilkley bracken fallen  among picnickers
solitary dream  wandering over the hill...  a poor traveller
against the mountains peaks and troughs of turmoiled sea  lay flat before me.
the summer shade shifts,  in a momentary time of june and quiet.
russian mobsters, brooding over chessboards -
building now rubble,  bruce banner  got angry!
i'm a grain of dust in the mercy of the wind... my single eternite
october's blood moon  internal tides ebb and flow the world is in flux
like a winter dream kittens jump in snowflakes  look-mother now smiles!
mountain path leads there but somehow i got stuck here  along the wrong path
sirius shining  i see her through the window  eight light years away.
we did a bootsale it was the first one this year  people like seagulls
my wheels stuck in mud  to break free impossible  please, someone help me.
incessant dark rains  dismal and monotonous-  pushes to dry hills
a little flower watching the wonderful moon set into the dawn
the animals sit making the only loud noise  is raging thunder
dream fragment in sun;  the light-embedded day blue,  rolling off the night.
our dialogue strains  in minutes to the day's clock;  nighttime alarmums.
melancholia,  and the subtle shift of dusk; darkly dropping night.
a harsh winter wind comes through my heart strings blowing  into emptiness
unfathomable: our empty day of language,  and thoughts for the night.
hungry sparrows flit  on the empty bird feeder, light snow on the ground
birds chirping a lot  people singing all the time birds are going south!
the sun lifts its warmth  sitting here in emptyness falling in the cloud
get rid of clutter  i find it rests my thinking the moon and i zen
my back gives pain  i learn to loose dignity  to stand is to cry.
i write my haiku  by candlelight in my bed  so quiet outside.
where is the full moon  hidden by mist and tall trees vivid in my mind.
i dream of a room it was a makeshift home i talk to myself.
the wonderous moon  sitting on the horizon  waiting for morning
the wind blowing hard but the leaves make no sound  which guides the spirit
the spirit guides you through the wonderous forest  the forest of life
the wind is angry howling with furiousnes for the days coming
from the warm distance  of decades in your smile, you appear to me.
tinkling key stroke blues washed out in fleets of summer; the gray sunday float.
identity shouts through a forest fog of language; self-affirmation.
disillusionment,  shadowed up in the new year;  fragmentary blues.
murky mess of thought,  twitching in the unconscious; submerged energy.
chance encounters lie dormant in the daily air; time's foggy grayness.
traveling home now  through the gray-backed wash of day,  rain on the highway.
a purple cherry tree  points west to the rounded hills; east wind in summer.
in luminous night;  familiar moon reflects- on the unknown sea.
above the ripple  and squall of deep troubled sea-  glides a flying fish.
field of grass and weed...  beautiful beyond the wire;  only beside trees.
full of pink and gray,  still leafless from the winter. galahs in the oak.
jealous fits the rage of daylight sour time saved for the winking night.
pink tissue floating  in a white toilet bowl -  spring . . .
the bees are buzzing. beautiful flowers are here. the flowers smell good.
the season of love  snow blankets the mountain side i stare with full heart
delicate, lacy  butterfly gently touches  silently away
keep out sign on path flowers steadily spreading  never learned to read
pretty purple rose  along the water coast line  with a sweet smell occurs
heavy wind and rain,  the drop of watery time on a windowpane.
broken line of geese  high in the gray autumn sky,  fly on despite loss
splashing home from school  in yellow raincoats, children laugh under dark skies
frozen blowing white, and all our plunging lifetimes  twitch in winter cold.
separate words fall,  down gray days of rainy past  and fragmented thought.
leaf rides sutumn stream  trout regrets its slow passing  hungry wait til spring
clouds sit still above  mountains stir a placid sea nature's beauty glows
a murder of crows sit on a rickety fence  waiting for something
two girls sitting in  the park ignore the light rain, zen meditation
moon over the snow  do the dogs scare the coyotes or coyotes the dogs
days the hours make in seconds to our prompting,  haphazard moment.
shadowy distance, the hectoring hurt of day in a flat echo.
broken glass and all, i wait behind the mirror  for a tweek of sun.
realization:  time's accidental moments,  my limitations.
frozen blowing white, and all our plunging lifetimes  twitch in winter cold.
sunrise gray to white midday black limbs shadow snow  sundown blue returns
ordinary talk,  the squirm of conversation: nothing much is said.
opportunities,  diminished in passing time: our lost narrow years.
unpredictable:  the chaos of streaming years, in a moment's time.
twenty-five small jade  buddhas sit in the window waiting to be bought
winter aproaches  working years are finishing spring will not return
yellow jelly beans, yum yum yum,  so much lemony flavor,
water drips down, from pans own hand, as it rains upon us,
phantom flame,  a warm wicker,  beauty of the dark night,
mass marketing, subliminal messages,  what has the media come to,
armor clad samurai, win back honor, plunge tanto into chest,
men walk down the moonlit path, kimonos dangling, like pagan gods,
            (can u read this)?
the sun is very bright, while we sit there in the light,  the sun is setting.
hi peoples ,gay ha  hahahahahahaha  hehehehehe
cold morning sun -  thin frost  on a sparrows wing
warped by fire  the wheelie bin carcase still smoulders
the day cracks laughter in fragmented finite time,  our shifting moments.
daytime fit of rage in a flat failing moment: cubicle tantrum.
enigmatic you,  treading the elusive day  away from me now.
common mystery: the thrust of hidden meanings i don't understand.
the day cracks laughter,  in fragmented finite time and shifting moments.
shadowy distance, the hectoring hurt of day in a flat echo.
dream fragment in sun:  the light-embedded day blue,  rolling off the night.
dissatisfaction:  the yawning stretch of worktime,  in afternoon space.
neighbor shot my dog  claimed he killed all his chickens  today they came back
snows force elk downhill  farmer drives elk to mountain no place left to starve
small tree by big house days weeks months seasons and years small house by big tree
pheasant regal on drifts  strutting he oversees all sometimes he breaks through
to him beautiful  lived, loved, cared, raised family  she forgets his name
inexplicable: all the sensory data  of a brief lifetime.
blood pours from mouth, the undead is back, rise of a vampire,
the water stands still, as the wind flows over the hill,  then again, were camping
pearl light, on cold shore, lights up the indigo sand;  i can see my way home.
everyone is talk- ing and we need to stop to  pass this class today
time comes in trial steeps of meandering thought, fractal memories.
morning ritual, the day's greeting between us:  no intimacy.
melancholia and the subtle shift of dusk, darkly dropping night.
identity shouts through a forest fog of language: murky mess of thought.
the summer shade shifts,  in a momentary time of june and quiet.
vending machines, so many snacks, so much diversity,
bullet fly high,  out of long tubes,  like birds of lead,
the ugly old crone, the poet prodigy, and the dreamer unite,
golden sun, pitch black moon, the gods of day and night,
feels so good,  let it all out, bad day on potty,
dragonfly,  crystal eyes, flutter in the sky,
the snake awakens,  as a cry cuts through the night,  from a far off prey.
hunting a monkey  in the forest with my bro so crazy o so crazy.
spinning, twirling leaves.  moving around the tall trees. fall leaves, winter comes.
summer time to play,  basketball soccer baseball, what do you say chief?
a breeze of winter, the wind on my face is nice,  i smell the flowers.
monkey's swing through tree"s thowing bananas at him  hit on the head dead!
sleeping beaver smells  bad, very bad, it kills humans  dead guys smell bad too
bow moves so fast through trees and through the leaves  hitting the target
the sun is bright today,  moring due glimers on the tall grass, for it is still morning,
sun is shinning bright, morning due on the tall grass for it is still morn.
milk milk lemonade, in the ocean fish living, they are so happy.
the breeze in the trees,  fast and cool when it hits me,  makes me shake my knees,
the summers day comes,  like a bundle of roses, floating on a pond.
the sun is so bright, shinning on the ground this morn, its so beautiful.
the sun is yellow the grass is very bright green  and is very clean
water could be deep,  the water may be vicious, yet it stops the heat,
the nature calls me , there is something dangerous, i should not be scared
i sit on a boat something "wow" catches my eye  wondering what the  ..
little birds fly far, but big birds fly close to us,  the birds go away.
summer brings the sun how we wish winter was done but fall is so fun
fish swim under lake  yum yum delicious fish bake now in my stomach
yo wut iz haiku is it sumtin dat you do well wat do you do
i love pizza  do u love pizza?  i love pizza!
haikus  suck  ma meatloaf
hobos are really  on mondays, and tuesdays they are with a guitar
cody wants to be  a hobo during school days he will break your fall
people are trying to go to the bath-  room and they won't go
wind is strong tonight  large wildfires could start tonight turn up the tv
sleep beckons the far grey country  beyond clouds
email flashes up  sullen workload increases endless lines and lines
our dialogue strains  in minutes to the day's clock:  smiling alarums.
from the warm distance  of decades in your smile, a winking night's dream.
tinkling key stroke blues,  washed out in fleets of summer: the gray sunday float.
the days and hours fall,  in drops of watery time:  morning finitude.
greedy man, steal steal steal,  mad with power,
last battle of a long war,  the one that decides it all,  the thrill of the fight,
man in white robe,  hung on lowercase t,  my first look at christianity,
i'm da bomb,  da samuri pirat,  communicating with urban hipsters,
something not spoken, taboo's are not to be told, make no exceptions.
summer is so fun  summer you can laugh and play summer is the best
spring will never come  it is always snow, snow, snow snow, please go away.
the hobo frets fast in a desert, very vast  then he burst in flames
wind whistling hard through the trees, waking my dreams turn over to sleep
light is shining bright glowing like stars in the sky,  oh my! it is night!
earth, wind, water, fire  these can all be a desire only one can win.
we need to end school.  it has gone on for so long. it is summer time.
i hate the winter its way too cold and windy  spring and fall are best
i am like nature. i can roar like a liger.  i will be very scary.
the hobo frets fast in a desert,very vast then he burst in flames
yo wut iz haiku iz it sumtin dat you do well wat do you do
the clouds are high sky up there in the bright sky  the clouds are fading
glisten in the sky, the stars, like bright topazes, mesmerize the trees.
hobos are stupid  they often live in box cars nobody likes them.
good morning aaron  you are quite insensible  you make bad haiku.
hobos are quite soft  so abundant on playgrounds, they can break your fall
bronwyn is a freak  hee hee ha ha ha ha ha  freaky bronwyn help
cameron is weird  he thinks he is a basho hee hee ha ha ha
meg is smelly poo she smells like whiffy blue cheese  smelly meggy smells
brenzo is a bum she smells like an old cheesepuff no-one likes bronwyn
brenzo is stinkey bronwyn is a cheesepuff too brenzo is stinky
haiku addiction paper scraps easy prey  intent poised pen waits
wording of haiku  poetry without substance  catches on the air
cold pebbles  sensations on skin  warmly now
lonely night  maq fills it nicely of warm thoughts
the trees have the mist smoke, fire- two bodies, one act  i but have a heart
brown innocent eyes i shiver when i feel you  still you're far away
without you beside me all i have is my fear that you won't return
a campfire dims its flames turn to dark ashes only to light again
mahogany clouds,  racing home as darkness comes,  leaving joy to melt.
autumn, a sad dove, flaps her wings to fly away;  i wonder where to?
i dream of summer
it was raining out  as i looked out the door  then there was thunder
cutting down the tree.  it is a long way to fall. deforestation.
summer time is fun  so many things to do  lets go have some fun
water is cool,  water may be dangeous,  yet it stops the heat,
i need help i need a haiuku poem about the trojan war as you as a sloider please help!!
nighttime is coming go to sleep weary hobo  nest in a boxcar
john bell hood is strange his picture is in classrooms  his face is too long
we are all hobos  some of us live in boxcars  some of us do not
in the grape day park hobos, under every tree one strums a guitar
yay for the hobos yay yay happy yay happy hobos are happy
flay all the hobos  flay all the hobos alive  their hides are so thick
from the recluses  cell the sweeat sparrows twitterings haunt - meditaiton fled.
the poor man is like  a planet- and his desires revolving sat'llites !
my floor is quite flat  looks asthough a vast expanc  i hate soft drink stains
sean is cool-sort of  he has lots more friends than bron  she is friendless-ha
oh skatepark, my foe  your concrete curves provide pain oh skatepark! i cry
cody writes a lot of haikus, and deserves to  get an award yeah
mary poppins is here at bear valley middle  school and is very...?
if i could sail far far away, stone vegitate, i would happily
the trees have the mist smoke, fire- two bodies, one act  i but half a heart
the path to heaven, is paved with spikes and thorns but,  reaching is divine
the waters slip away  what we put off for tomorrow  must now become today
others simply walk. you move like silk in warm air. i you beauty dwells.
cranes dance on silk  lotus flowers on still pond mother's kimono
evanescent dream  disintegrating castle no longer supreme
mornings are mornings,  timeless in my tiny world,  my earth, azure joy.
ah... summer breeze ah... she loves to make us warm ah... summer breeze ah...
the grass is growing  or i am dwindling low but the world wont stop
it was raining out  as i looked out the door  then i heard thunder
i love cars so much they can go fast like lambos  and burn rubber too
i am a cool guy i think that peoples are random yay to the me, yeah
not as like before  why the sudden change in wind?  questioning the fall
brisk as time's pace, wondering who i am now, not who i once was.
the shimmering mist on the clear smooth glass a breath in and out
the mouse eating seed the black cat in the grasses  life at a standstill
the pregnant lady stared at her man's member and  remarked, "that looks fake."
bright white snow and ice.  biting bone chilling cold wind. i made hot kale soup.
comment2, xenical,  uba, diazepam,  >:-)), buy
soundless low gray sky  air spiced with applewood smoke fall will end tonight
atop peak all down  within valley all are up  hillside path variety
in battle with fall winter coldly sneaks by defeat is chilling
neighbors shoot their coyotes mine eat the mice and gophers mine must be better
some think horrific on the ground, white all around i say terrific
play table sitters, like an old mans erection,  sad and yet funny
rainy afternoon black dog shivers at the door throws in the towel.
rhododendronbush: each bud saved her flower for this sunny spring.
colorful fall leaves fall blowing in the pretty calming and soothing
sarah likes to hack computers every morning in a the classrooms
captain mot has a hot which he likes to wear a  lot during school days
attempted haiku may seem contrived or may not how about this one
oak tree bare roots up  lies broken across my path  rotting back to earth
ominous fingers point from autumn's morning sky heaven beckons us
i have a stick  i have a woody  where is my cactus
balls need licking  like felt
fountain pen gliding  across silky white vellum thoughts actualize
he stuck in his thumb and made her yell. she was not  loud. but she did.
he wonders: is it acceptable? it might be controversial. sigh.
kittens circling  while mother searches for milk  here comes there owner
swallowing the bait catfish hooked on ten pound test  no dinner tonight.
honeybees browsing  on the flowering hostas even in this heat.
oceans of light spill like rice wine from lips which have kissed the rising sun.
ants on a picnic  i told you this would happen  you never listen
rocky mountains rise  against a clear western sky,  where the eagle flies.
the stars in the sky  twinkle so bright in my eye looking up at me
death, a mystery  never comes,never wanted  just a a menace
lonely mountain gazing below  at fertile valleys
the time here is brief  chamber music fills the hall  when peace rules the dawn.
outside my window it is raining all is wet  but not my spirit
bathing boys  water cools hot tap on, and on
a great cement lion guards my front door  i sneak out the back.
a pond, frog jumps in,  i follow.
i have a stick  your eyes are brown hello carpet
existential universal explored  quantified boredom
snowflakes pirouette  scrabble cold alphabet soup from a haiku sky.
something tiny  boldly swimming shore to shore  in my water glass
on the lonely moors the wind cuts into your face  stranded, far from home
a tree in twilight  i follow the sound of birds to their silhouettes
searchlights scissor sky  siren hurds us down the tube  drowning under dricks
brown eyes black coffee,  i woke up early today,  and it was snowing.
indian summer
inside the mirror an onion peeling itself over and over
natural beauty  ever changing hills and dunes cold, ruthless killer
something's gathering the animals are long gone thunder is roaring..
it sways all alone  nature gave it its place here we take it from it.
outside, something brews  the wind is strong, the air's cold  nature is acting.
green towering trees  meadows with green, green grass perfect spot to rest.
lying jerk he is, acts all sweet and innocent,  well what should i do
sick of this torture, feel so unhappy today,  i wrote a haiku.
horizon, moving only when you do, constant  ruler of the sky
five, seven and five. this seventeen syllables  caught in a pom.
looking at nature,  seeing struggle and splendour a nw thought was caught.
i know many words but i may not speak them here at grandfather's grave
oregon sun sets late  three sisters sit so lonely pale moon draws anear
birds just want to be free as their wings let them be cages cause them pain
one day we will die what then is the need to kill still we go to war
my world once so dark light has become mute, like pitch impenetrable
tiger in the grass  my baby boy tickled nose
morning sun rangitoto looms alive at last
winter sun  warm woolen back  cloud cools
gray steamy morning soft voice of falling rain  rose petals shudder
my heart thumps and my eyes stare into the distance the loud sound! its over in a flash
its fragile grip lost a leaf drifts gently to earth - winter calls us home
dark clouds rolling in  consume the sun with their wrath -  hotdogs on the grill
moving reflections  of clouds upon the water  blurred from gods tears
summer nights air   both my mind and cigar smoke  drifting.
in a show of power  i take from my sister happiness.
a grasshopper on  my hand, pretending to be a leaf.
shopping all day  no more at ease than before.
heart beats patiently,  i wait quietly for my love, do i wait in vain?
i don't why life  has to be so rough  so confusing
love is what you give-  fragrant flower in the wind the shade of a tree
once upon a time, (how original that was) ...where was i again?
misshapen ugly  hiking boots; just the right look to go with my brace
overturned earth for  the new garden-birds dive in  for the harvest
dont step on the cracks in the butterfly garden oops  one insect less.
my cuban lover  twirls the knit scarf from her neck and she is naked.
droplets cling to glass as if suspended in air. spring pitter-patter.
sleep brings needed calm  after a long day of work. close your eyes and dream.
fresh rabbit road kill  steaming in the tule fog  unseen crows chuckle
brown crosses my mind as i flush the white toilet,  the thoughts go away
flowers are dark red  they smell like the deep brown stuff  they taste like poopy
rain is falling down. the leaves are green and orange i am wet and cold.
pokemon are great they always catch the poke bait!  gotta catch em all!
the birds are chirping, i love the mud under my feet, leaves are returning
the leaves have fallen, the wind just sweeps them away, therefore kids can play.
dip drop bang boom flash  the rain, thunder, and lighting feel, hear, see the storm
drip drop bang boom flash the rain, thunder, and lighting feel, hear, see the storm
something is coming. . . .  its going crack, boom, bang. . . . .  omg its a s t o r m
dog chases mouse needing food ends up with a house with mouse under never having mouse dinner.
a tiger in africa hunting a gazelle in plane site
walking through the woods i hear click crash trees falling  waited a second
i love the sound of hocking.  like the movie meet the fockers.  the men honk when they're horny
hobos are stupid  the often life on the streets they dont own nutting
the snow is coming down hard  ooo please  please  please  yes no school today
rain in the distance, blackout in the large city, the storm is strong.
ching chang cho boom bam bo loop lap lah.
the wind is ice cold  the ice is everywhere i'm stuck in winter
appetite fulfilled  all wanted, nothing needed  a life alone paid
only best and cheap pills:  free viagra. buying viagra online. natura
perfect eye exam  god in his compassion knows already deaf
my favorite shade of green in fashion again -spring
snakes are eating mice, they are very mean today, i think one saw me.
people have good things some people just smell nasty  and people are gross
i wish for someone  to remove pretend haiku go back to honor
fog comes on little cat feet. it sits looking over harbor on silent haunches.
one window is all i need to see   the icy trees after it just stormed.
the hawk spreads their wings  flying high up while i watch  and envy their luck
death is a wonder.  it never comes as a guest,  but as a beggar.
the wind doesn't stop,  cold is the little turtle:  he has no blanket
thunderstorms are like a random loud boo but  then there's a flash after
he is a cheating brat,  he is cheated on my bestfriend, wow he is a jerk
fresh cut hair itches a reminder of my loss i weep for the past
winter brings cold pain these joints creak and crack and pop  when did i get old?
these words are crafty  they have stolen precious time  that you can't get back
inconceivable.  you keep on using this word.  you misunderstand.
red lights running down the street and past the pine tree where has the moon gone?
ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

Lewis Carroll

CHAPTER I. Down the Rabbit-Hole

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in
it, 'and what is the use of a book,' thought Alice 'without pictures or
conversations?'

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure
of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so
VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, 'Oh dear!
Oh dear! I shall be late!' (when she thought it over afterwards, it
occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time
it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH
OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on,
Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had
never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch
to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field
after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large
rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep
well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was
going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what
she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as
she passed; it was labelled 'ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as
she fell past it.

'Well!' thought Alice to herself, 'after such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll all think me at
home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the top
of the house!' (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! 'I wonder how
many miles I've fallen by this time?' she said aloud. 'I must be getting
somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four
thousand miles down, I think--' (for, you see, Alice had learnt several
things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this
was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there
was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over)
'--yes, that's about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or
Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. 'I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the
earth! How funny it'll seem to come out among the people that walk with
their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think--' (she was rather glad
there WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn't sound at all the
right word) '--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country
is, you know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and
she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you're falling
through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) 'And what an
ignorant little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do to
ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.'

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. 'Dinah'll miss me very much to-night, I should think!'
(Dinah was the cat.) 'I hope they'll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no
mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very
like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?' And here Alice
began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy
sort of way, 'Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, 'Do
bats eat cats?' for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question,
it didn't much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing
off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with
Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, 'Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:
did you ever eat a bat?' when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon
a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, 'Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it's getting!' She was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage
into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the
doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, 'it
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.'
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately,
that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really
impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, ('which certainly was not here
before,' said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words 'DRINK ME' beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say 'Drink me,' but the wise little Alice was
not going to do THAT in a hurry. 'No, I'll look first,' she said, 'and
see whether it's marked "poison" or not'; for she had read several nice
little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild
beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not remember
the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot
poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked 'poison,' it is
almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked 'poison,' so Alice ventured to taste
it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour
of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot
buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'What a curious feeling!' said Alice; 'I must be shutting up like a
telescope.'

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this; 'for it might end, you know,' said
Alice to herself, 'in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder
what I should be like then?' And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

'Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to herself,
rather sharply; 'I advise you to leave off this minute!' She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
'But it's no use now,' thought poor Alice, 'to pretend to be two people!
Why, there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!'

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
'EAT ME' were beautifully marked in currants. 'Well, I'll eat it,' said
Alice, 'and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I'll
get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!'

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, 'Which way? Which
way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on
in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




CHAPTER II. The Pool of Tears

'Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); 'now I'm
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!'
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
sight, they were getting so far off). 'Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I'm sure
_I_ shan't be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;--but I must be
kind to them,' thought Alice, 'or perhaps they won't walk the way I want
to go! Let me see: I'll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.'

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. 'They must
go by the carrier,' she thought; 'and how funny it'll seem, sending
presents to one's own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

     ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
       HEARTHRUG,
         NEAR THE FENDER,
           (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

'You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, 'a great girl like
you,' (she might well say this), 'to go on crying in this way! Stop this
moment, I tell you!' But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of
tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reaching half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in
one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great
hurry, muttering to himself as he came, 'Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!
Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her waiting!' Alice felt so
desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, 'If you please, sir--'
The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan,
and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: 'Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I've been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a
little different. But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who
in the world am I? Ah, THAT'S the great puzzle!' And she began thinking
over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to
see if she could have been changed for any of them.

'I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, 'for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I, and--oh dear, how puzzling
it all is! I'll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and
four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!
However, the Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and
Rome--no, THAT'S all wrong, I'm certain! I must have been changed for
Mabel! I'll try and say "How doth the little--"' and she crossed her
hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,
but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the
same as they used to do:--

     'How doth the little crocodile
      Improve his shining tail,
     And pour the waters of the Nile
      On every golden scale!

     'How cheerfully he seems to grin,
      How neatly spread his claws,
     And welcome little fishes in
      With gently smiling jaws!'

'I'm sure those are not the right words,' said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, 'I must be Mabel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I've
made up my mind about it; if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be no
use their putting their heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!" I
shall only look up and say "Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then,
if I like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here
till I'm somebody else"--but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a sudden burst
of tears, 'I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired
of being all alone here!'

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves while
she was talking. 'How CAN I have done that?' she thought. 'I must
be growing small again.' She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found
out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped
it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

'That WAS a narrow escape!' said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; 'and
now for the garden!' and she ran with all speed back to the little door:
but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was
lying on the glass table as before, 'and things are worse than ever,'
thought the poor child, 'for I never was so small as this before, never!
And I declare it's too bad, that it is!'

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she
had somehow fallen into the sea, 'and in that case I can go back by
railway,' she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

'I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. 'I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!
However, everything is queer to-day.'

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

'Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, 'to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in trying.' So she
began: 'O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!' (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother's Latin Grammar, 'A mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!') The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

'Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; 'I daresay it's
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.' (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: 'Ou est ma chatte?' which
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
'Oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt
the poor animal's feelings. 'I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

'Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. 'Would
YOU like cats if you were me?'

'Well, perhaps not,' said Alice in a soothing tone: 'don't be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you'd
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet
thing,' Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the
pool, 'and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and
washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she's
such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!' cried
Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she
felt certain it must be really offended. 'We won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not.'

'We indeed!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. 'As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED
cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear the name again!'

'I won't indeed!' said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. 'Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?' The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: 'There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things when
you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things--I can't remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer,
you know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds! He
says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!' cried Alice in a sorrowful
tone, 'I'm afraid I've offended it again!' For the Mouse was swimming
away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in
the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, 'Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't like them!' When the
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its
face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, 'Let us get to the shore, and then I'll tell you my
history, and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale

They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had
known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, 'I am older than
you, and must know better'; and this Alice would not allow without
knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its
age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out, 'Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I'LL soon make you
dry enough!' They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

'Ahem!' said the Mouse with an important air, 'are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! "William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of
Mercia and Northumbria--"'

'Ugh!' said the Lory, with a shiver.

'I beg your pardon!' said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: 'Did
you speak?'

'Not I!' said the Lory hastily.

'I thought you did,' said the Mouse. '--I proceed. "Edwin and Morcar,
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand,
the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable--"'

'Found WHAT?' said the Duck.

'Found IT,' the Mouse replied rather crossly: 'of course you know what
"it" means.'

'I know what "it" means well enough, when I find a thing,' said the
Duck: 'it's generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?'

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, '"--found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the
crown. William's conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his
Normans--" How are you getting on now, my dear?' it continued, turning
to Alice as it spoke.

'As wet as ever,' said Alice in a melancholy tone: 'it doesn't seem to
dry me at all.'

'In that case,' said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, 'I move
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies--'

'Speak English!' said the Eaglet. 'I don't know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do either!' And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.

'What I was going to say,' said the Dodo in an offended tone, 'was, that
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.'

'What IS a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much to know,
but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,
and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

'Why,' said the Dodo, 'the best way to explain it is to do it.' (And, as
you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell
you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, ('the exact
shape doesn't matter,' it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no 'One, two, three, and
away,' but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,
the Dodo suddenly called out 'The race is over!' and they all crowded
round it, panting, and asking, 'But who has won?'

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,
and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead
(the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures
of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,
'EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.'

'But who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices asked.

'Why, SHE, of course,' said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger;
and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused
way, 'Prizes! Prizes!'

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one
a-piece all round.

'But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the Mouse.

'Of course,' the Dodo replied very gravely. 'What else have you got in
your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.

'Only a thimble,' said Alice sadly.

'Hand it over here,' said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying 'We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble'; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she
could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

'You promised to tell me your history, you know,' said Alice, 'and why
it is you hate--C and D,' she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

'Mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and
sighing.

'It IS a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, looking down with wonder at
the Mouse's tail; 'but why do you call it sad?' And she kept on puzzling
about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was
something like this:--

         'Fury said to a
         mouse, That he
        met in the
       house,
     "Let us
      both go to
       law: I will
        prosecute
         YOU.--Come,
           I'll take no
           denial; We
          must have a
        trial: For
      really this
     morning I've
    nothing
    to do."
     Said the
      mouse to the
       cur, "Such
        a trial,
         dear Sir,
            With
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wasting
      our
      breath."
       "I'll be
        judge, I'll
         be jury,"
            Said
         cunning
          old Fury:
          "I'll
          try the
            whole
            cause,
              and
           condemn
           you
          to
           death."'


'You are not attending!' said the Mouse to Alice severely. 'What are you
thinking of?'

'I beg your pardon,' said Alice very humbly: 'you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?'

'I had NOT!' cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

'A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. 'Oh, do let me help to undo it!'

'I shall do nothing of the sort,' said the Mouse, getting up and walking
away. 'You insult me by talking such nonsense!'

'I didn't mean it!' pleaded poor Alice. 'But you're so easily offended,
you know!'

The Mouse only growled in reply.

'Please come back and finish your story!' Alice called after it; and the
others all joined in chorus, 'Yes, please do!' but the Mouse only shook
its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

'What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite
out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her
daughter 'Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
YOUR temper!' 'Hold your tongue, Ma!' said the young Crab, a little
snappishly. 'You're enough to try the patience of an oyster!'

'I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!' said Alice aloud, addressing
nobody in particular. 'She'd soon fetch it back!'

'And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?' said the
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
'Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching mice you
can't think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!'

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, 'I really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn't suit my throat!' and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to
its children, 'Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!'
On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

'I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. 'Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!' And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard
a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming
back to finish his story.




CHAPTER IV. The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill

It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself 'The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I wonder?' Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves,
and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in
the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,
had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, 'Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you doing
out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
Quick, now!' And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once
in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it
had made.

'He took me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran. 'How
surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am! But I'd better take him
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.' As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name 'W. RABBIT' engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

'How queer it seems,' Alice said to herself, 'to be going messages for
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah'll be sending me on messages next!' And she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: '"Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!" "Coming in a minute,
nurse! But I've got to see that the mouse doesn't get out." Only I don't
think,' Alice went on, 'that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if it
began ordering people about like that!'

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,
and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time
with the words 'DRINK ME,' but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it
to her lips. 'I know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,' she said
to herself, 'whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what
this bottle does. I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for really
I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!'

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself 'That's quite enough--I hope I shan't
grow any more--As it is, I can't get out at the door--I do wish I hadn't
drunk quite so much!'

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself 'Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?'

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

'It was much pleasanter at home,' thought poor Alice, 'when one wasn't
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and
yet--it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what
CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!
There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when I
grow up, I'll write one--but I'm grown up now,' she added in a sorrowful
tone; 'at least there's no room to grow up any more HERE.'

'But then,' thought Alice, 'shall I NEVER get any older than I am
now? That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but
then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't like THAT!'

'Oh, you foolish Alice!' she answered herself. 'How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there's hardly room for YOU, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!'

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making
quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard
a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

'Mary Ann! Mary Ann!' said the voice. 'Fetch me my gloves this moment!'
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large
as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself 'Then I'll
go round and get in at the window.'

'THAT you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit's--'Pat! Pat! Where are you?' And
then a voice she had never heard before, 'Sure then I'm here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!'

'Digging for apples, indeed!' said the Rabbit angrily. 'Here! Come and
help me out of THIS!' (Sounds of more broken glass.)

'Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?'

'Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!' (He pronounced it 'arrum.')

'An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
window!'

'Sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.'

'Well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!'

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, 'Sure, I don't like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!' 'Do as I tell you, you coward!' and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were
TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. 'What a number of
cucumber-frames there must be!' thought Alice. 'I wonder what they'll do
next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! I'm
sure I don't want to stay in here any longer!'

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices
all talking together: she made out the words: 'Where's the other
ladder?--Why, I hadn't to bring but one; Bill's got the other--Bill!
fetch it here, lad!--Here, put 'em up at this corner--No, tie 'em
together first--they don't reach half high enough yet--Oh! they'll
do well enough; don't be particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it's coming
down! Heads below!' (a loud crash)--'Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I
fancy--Who's to go down the chimney?--Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!--That I
won't, then!--Bill's to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you're to
go down the chimney!'

'Oh! So Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said Alice to
herself. 'Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn't be in
Bill's place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I THINK I can kick a little!'

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited
till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself 'This is Bill,' she gave one sharp kick, and waited to
see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of 'There goes Bill!'
then the Rabbit's voice along--'Catch him, you by the hedge!' then
silence, and then another confusion of voices--'Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don't choke him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!'

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, ('That's Bill,' thought
Alice,) 'Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I'm better now--but I'm
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!'

'So you did, old fellow!' said the others.

'We must burn the house down!' said the Rabbit's voice; and Alice called
out as loud as she could, 'If you do. I'll set Dinah at you!'

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, 'I
wonder what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, they'd take the
roof off.' After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say, 'A barrowful will do, to begin with.'

'A barrowful of WHAT?' thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. 'I'll put a stop to this,'
she said to herself, and shouted out, 'You'd better not do that again!'
which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. 'If I eat one of these cakes,' she thought, 'it's sure to make
SOME change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it must
make me smaller, I suppose.'

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little
animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was
in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

'The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she wandered
about in the wood, 'is to grow to my right size again; and the second
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be
the best plan.'

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. 'Poor little thing!'
said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but
she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be
hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of
all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and
till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

'And yet what a dear little puppy it was!' said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves: 'I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I'd
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I'd nearly forgotten that
I've got to grow up again! Let me see--how IS it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?'

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar,
that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long
hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.




CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar

The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence:
at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed
her in a languid, sleepy voice.

'Who are YOU?' said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
rather shyly, 'I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know
who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since then.'

'What do you mean by that?' said the Caterpillar sternly. 'Explain
yourself!'

'I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said Alice, 'because I'm not
myself, you see.'

'I don't see,' said the Caterpillar.

'I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice replied very politely,
'for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.'

'It isn't,' said the Caterpillar.

'Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said Alice; 'but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then
after that into a butterfly, I should think you'll feel it a little
queer, won't you?'

'Not a bit,' said the Caterpillar.

'Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,' said Alice; 'all I know
is, it would feel very queer to ME.'

'You!' said the Caterpillar contemptuously. 'Who are YOU?'

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar's making such VERY
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, 'I think,
you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.'

'Why?' said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.

'Come back!' the Caterpillar called after her. 'I've something important
to say!'

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

'Keep your temper,' said the Caterpillar.

'Is that all?' said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

'No,' said the Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and
perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some
minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its
arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, 'So you think
you're changed, do you?'

'I'm afraid I am, sir,' said Alice; 'I can't remember things as I
used--and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!'

'Can't remember WHAT things?' said the Caterpillar.

'Well, I've tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE," but it all came
different!' Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

'Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,"' said the Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:--

   'You are old, Father William,' the young man said,
    'And your hair has become very white;
   And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?'

   'In my youth,' Father William replied to his son,
    'I feared it might injure the brain;
   But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.'

   'You are old,' said the youth, 'as I mentioned before,
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;
   Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
    Pray, what is the reason of that?'

   'In my youth,' said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    'I kept all my limbs very supple
   By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
    Allow me to sell you a couple?'

   'You are old,' said the youth, 'and your jaws are too weak
    For anything tougher than suet;
   Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
    Pray how did you manage to do it?'

   'In my youth,' said his father, 'I took to the law,
    And argued each case with my wife;
   And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has lasted the rest of my life.'

   'You are old,' said the youth, 'one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
   Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
    What made you so awfully clever?'

   'I have answered three questions, and that is enough,'
    Said his father; 'don't give yourself airs!
   Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!'


'That is not said right,' said the Caterpillar.

'Not QUITE right, I'm afraid,' said Alice, timidly; 'some of the words
have got altered.'

'It is wrong from beginning to end,' said the Caterpillar decidedly, and
there was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

'What size do you want to be?' it asked.

'Oh, I'm not particular as to size,' Alice hastily replied; 'only one
doesn't like changing so often, you know.'

'I DON'T know,' said the Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

'Are you content now?' said the Caterpillar.

'Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldn't mind,'
said Alice: 'three inches is such a wretched height to be.'

'It is a very good height indeed!' said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

'But I'm not used to it!' pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And
she thought of herself, 'I wish the creatures wouldn't be so easily
offended!'

'You'll get used to it in time,' said the Caterpillar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In
a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth
and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,
'One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.'

'One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?' thought Alice to herself.

'Of the mushroom,' said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying
to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly
round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she
stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit
of the edge with each hand.

'And now which is which?' she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent
blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand bit.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'Come, my head's free at last!' said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

'What CAN all that green stuff be?' said Alice. 'And where HAVE my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't see you?'
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she
tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her
neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had
just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going
to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops
of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made
her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and
was beating her violently with its wings.

'Serpent!' screamed the Pigeon.

'I'm NOT a serpent!' said Alice indignantly. 'Let me alone!'

'Serpent, I say again!' repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,
and added with a kind of sob, 'I've tried every way, and nothing seems
to suit them!'

'I haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said Alice.

'I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've tried
hedges,' the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; 'but those
serpents! There's no pleasing them!'

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

'As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs,' said the Pigeon;
'but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!'

'I'm very sorry you've been annoyed,' said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

'And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood,' continued the
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, 'and just as I was thinking I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from
the sky! Ugh, Serpent!'

'But I'm NOT a serpent, I tell you!' said Alice. 'I'm a--I'm a--'

'Well! WHAT are you?' said the Pigeon. 'I can see you're trying to
invent something!'

'I--I'm a little girl,' said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.

'A likely story indeed!' said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. 'I've seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE
with such a neck as that! No, no! You're a serpent; and there's no use
denying it. I suppose you'll be telling me next that you never tasted an
egg!'

'I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,' said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; 'but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.'

'I don't believe it,' said the Pigeon; 'but if they do, why then they're
a kind of serpent, that's all I can say.'

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, 'You're
looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to me
whether you're a little girl or a serpent?'

'It matters a good deal to ME,' said Alice hastily; 'but I'm not looking
for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn't want YOURS: I don't
like them raw.'

'Well, be off, then!' said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she
remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. 'Come, there's half my plan done
now! How puzzling all these changes are! I'm never sure what I'm going
to be, from one minute to another! However, I've got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that
to be done, I wonder?' As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open
place, with a little house in it about four feet high. 'Whoever lives
there,' thought Alice, 'it'll never do to come upon them THIS size: why,
I should frighten them out of their wits!' So she began nibbling at the
righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she
had brought herself down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI. Pig and Pepper

For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the
wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened
by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all
over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about,
and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, 'For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen
to play croquet.' The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone,
only changing the order of the words a little, 'From the Queen. An
invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.'

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the
wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

'There's no sort of use in knocking,' said the Footman, 'and that for
two reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.' And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

'Please, then,' said Alice, 'how am I to get in?'

'There might be some sense in your knocking,' the Footman went on
without attending to her, 'if we had the door between us. For instance,
if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.'
He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this
Alice thought decidedly uncivil. 'But perhaps he can't help it,' she
said to herself; 'his eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head.
But at any rate he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?' she
repeated, aloud.

'I shall sit here,' the Footman remarked, 'till tomorrow--'

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the Footman's head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

'--or next day, maybe,' the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.

'How am I to get in?' asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

'ARE you to get in at all?' said the Footman. 'That's the first
question, you know.'

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. 'It's really
dreadful,' she muttered to herself, 'the way all the creatures argue.
It's enough to drive one crazy!'

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. 'I shall sit here,' he said, 'on and off, for
days and days.'

'But what am I to do?' said Alice.

'Anything you like,' said the Footman, and began whistling.

'Oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately: 'he's
perfectly idiotic!' And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in
the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

'There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!' Alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess
sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment's pause. The only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on
the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

'Please would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, 'why
your cat grins like that?'

'It's a Cheshire cat,' said the Duchess, 'and that's why. Pig!'

She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby,
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--

'I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know
that cats COULD grin.'

'They all can,' said the Duchess; 'and most of 'em do.'

'I don't know of any that do,' Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

'You don't know much,' said the Duchess; 'and that's a fact.'

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

'Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up and down in
an agony of terror. 'Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS nose'; as an unusually
large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

'If everybody minded their own business,' the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, 'the world would go round a deal faster than it does.'

'Which would NOT be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very glad to get
an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. 'Just think of
what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--'

'Talking of axes,' said the Duchess, 'chop off her head!'

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: 'Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or is
it twelve? I--'

'Oh, don't bother ME,' said the Duchess; 'I never could abide figures!'
And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of
every line:

   'Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
   He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.'

         CHORUS.

 (In which the cook and the baby joined):--

       'Wow! wow! wow!'

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:--

   'I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
   For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!'

         CHORUS.

       'Wow! wow! wow!'

'Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. 'I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen,' and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, 'just
like a star-fish,' thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried
it out into the open air. 'IF I don't take this child away with me,'
thought Alice, 'they're sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn't it be
murder to leave it behind?' She said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
'Don't grunt,' said Alice; 'that's not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.'

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to
see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its
eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not
like the look of the thing at all. 'But perhaps it was only sobbing,'
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any
tears.

No, there were no tears. 'If you're going to turn into a pig, my dear,'
said Alice, seriously, 'I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!' The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, 'Now, what am I to do with
this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted again, so violently,
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could
be NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she
felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see
it trot away quietly into the wood. 'If it had grown up,' she said
to herself, 'it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think.' And she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, 'if one only knew the right way to change them--' when she
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

'Cheshire Puss,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
'Come, it's pleased so far,' thought Alice, and she went on. 'Would you
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?'

'That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,' said the Cat.

'I don't much care where--' said Alice.

'Then it doesn't matter which way you go,' said the Cat.

'--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,' Alice added as an explanation.

'Oh, you're sure to do that,' said the Cat, 'if you only walk long
enough.'

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
'What sort of people live about here?'

'In THAT direction,' the Cat said, waving its right paw round, 'lives
a Hatter: and in THAT direction,' waving the other paw, 'lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad.'

'But I don't want to go among mad people,' Alice remarked.

'Oh, you can't help that,' said the Cat: 'we're all mad here. I'm mad.
You're mad.'

'How do you know I'm mad?' said Alice.

'You must be,' said the Cat, 'or you wouldn't have come here.'

Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she went on 'And how
do you know that you're mad?'

'To begin with,' said the Cat, 'a dog's not mad. You grant that?'

'I suppose so,' said Alice.

'Well, then,' the Cat went on, 'you see, a dog growls when it's angry,
and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm pleased, and
wag my tail when I'm angry. Therefore I'm mad.'

'I call it purring, not growling,' said Alice.

'Call it what you like,' said the Cat. 'Do you play croquet with the
Queen to-day?'

'I should like it very much,' said Alice, 'but I haven't been invited
yet.'

'You'll see me there,' said the Cat, and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

'By-the-bye, what became of the baby?' said the Cat. 'I'd nearly
forgotten to ask.'

'It turned into a pig,' Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

'I thought it would,' said the Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the March Hare was said to live. 'I've seen hatters before,' she
said to herself; 'the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad--at least not so mad as
it was in March.' As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

'Did you say pig, or fig?' said the Cat.

'I said pig,' replied Alice; 'and I wish you wouldn't keep appearing and
vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.'

'All right,' said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

'Well! I've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought Alice; 'but a grin
without a cat! It's the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!'

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house
of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to
about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly,
saying to herself 'Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost
wish I'd gone to see the Hatter instead!'




CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. 'Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,' thought Alice; 'only, as it's asleep, I
suppose it doesn't mind.'

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: 'No room! No room!' they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. 'There's PLENTY of room!' said Alice indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

'Have some wine,' the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
'I don't see any wine,' she remarked.

'There isn't any,' said the March Hare.

'Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it,' said Alice angrily.

'It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited,' said
the March Hare.

'I didn't know it was YOUR table,' said Alice; 'it's laid for a great
many more than three.'

'Your hair wants cutting,' said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

'You should learn not to make personal remarks,' Alice said with some
severity; 'it's very rude.'

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAID
was, 'Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'

'Come, we shall have some fun now!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad they've
begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,' she added aloud.

'Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?' said the
March Hare.

'Exactly so,' said Alice.

'Then you should say what you mean,' the March Hare went on.

'I do,' Alice hastily replied; 'at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's the same thing, you know.'

'Not the same thing a bit!' said the Hatter. 'You might just as well say
that "I see what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat what I see"!'

'You might just as well say,' added the March Hare, 'that "I like what I
get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!'

'You might just as well say,' added the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, 'that "I breathe when I sleep" is the same thing
as "I sleep when I breathe"!'

'It IS the same thing with you,' said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,
which wasn't much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. 'What day of the month
is it?' he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and then said 'The fourth.'

'Two days wrong!' sighed the Hatter. 'I told you butter wouldn't suit
the works!' he added looking angrily at the March Hare.

'It was the BEST butter,' the March Hare meekly replied.

'Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,' the Hatter grumbled:
'you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.'

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, 'It was the BEST butter,
you know.'

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. 'What a
funny watch!' she remarked. 'It tells the day of the month, and doesn't
tell what o'clock it is!'

'Why should it?' muttered the Hatter. 'Does YOUR watch tell you what
year it is?'

'Of course not,' Alice replied very readily: 'but that's because it
stays the same year for such a long time together.'

'Which is just the case with MINE,' said the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. 'I don't quite
understand you,' she said, as politely as she could.

'The Dormouse is asleep again,' said the Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, 'Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.'

'Have you guessed the riddle yet?' the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

'No, I give it up,' Alice replied: 'what's the answer?'

'I haven't the slightest idea,' said the Hatter.

'Nor I,' said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. 'I think you might do something better with the
time,' she said, 'than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.'

'If you knew Time as well as I do,' said the Hatter, 'you wouldn't talk
about wasting IT. It's HIM.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Alice.

'Of course you don't!' the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
'I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'

'Perhaps not,' Alice cautiously replied: 'but I know I have to beat time
when I learn music.'

'Ah! that accounts for it,' said the Hatter. 'He won't stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost anything
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o'clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!'

('I only wish it was,' the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

'That would be grand, certainly,' said Alice thoughtfully: 'but then--I
shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'

'Not at first, perhaps,' said the Hatter: 'but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.'

'Is that the way YOU manage?' Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. 'Not I!' he replied. 'We
quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--' (pointing
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) '--it was at the great concert
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

     "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
     How I wonder what you're at!"

You know the song, perhaps?'

'I've heard something like it,' said Alice.

'It goes on, you know,' the Hatter continued, 'in this way:--

     "Up above the world you fly,
     Like a tea-tray in the sky.
         Twinkle, twinkle--"'

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep 'Twinkle,
twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--' and went on so long that they had to pinch
it to make it stop.

'Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the Hatter, 'when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out, "He's murdering the time! Off with his
head!"'

'How dreadfully savage!' exclaimed Alice.

'And ever since that,' the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, 'he won't
do a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock now.'

A bright idea came into Alice's head. 'Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?' she asked.

'Yes, that's it,' said the Hatter with a sigh: 'it's always tea-time,
and we've no time to wash the things between whiles.'

'Then you keep moving round, I suppose?' said Alice.

'Exactly so,' said the Hatter: 'as the things get used up.'

'But what happens when you come to the beginning again?' Alice ventured
to ask.

'Suppose we change the subject,' the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
'I'm getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.'

'I'm afraid I don't know one,' said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

'Then the Dormouse shall!' they both cried. 'Wake up, Dormouse!' And
they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. 'I wasn't asleep,' he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: 'I heard every word you fellows were saying.'

'Tell us a story!' said the March Hare.

'Yes, please do!' pleaded Alice.

'And be quick about it,' added the Hatter, 'or you'll be asleep again
before it's done.'

'Once upon a time there were three little sisters,' the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; 'and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well--'

'What did they live on?' said Alice, who always took a great interest in
questions of eating and drinking.

'They lived on treacle,' said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

'They couldn't have done that, you know,' Alice gently remarked; 'they'd
have been ill.'

'So they were,' said the Dormouse; 'VERY ill.'

Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: 'But
why did they live at the bottom of a well?'

'Take some more tea,' the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

'I've had nothing yet,' Alice replied in an offended tone, 'so I can't
take more.'

'You mean you can't take LESS,' said the Hatter: 'it's very easy to take
MORE than nothing.'

'Nobody asked YOUR opinion,' said Alice.

'Who's making personal remarks now?' the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself
to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. 'Why did they live at the bottom of a well?'

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, 'It was a treacle-well.'

'There's no such thing!' Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went 'Sh! sh!' and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, 'If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story for
yourself.'

'No, please go on!' Alice said very humbly; 'I won't interrupt again. I
dare say there may be ONE.'

'One, indeed!' said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. 'And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw,
you know--'

'What did they draw?' said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

'Treacle,' said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

'I want a clean cup,' interrupted the Hatter: 'let's all move one place
on.'

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly took
the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: 'But I don't understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?'

'You can draw water out of a water-well,' said the Hatter; 'so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid?'

'But they were IN the well,' Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing to
notice this last remark.

'Of course they were', said the Dormouse; '--well in.'

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

'They were learning to draw,' the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; 'and they drew all manner of
things--everything that begins with an M--'

'Why with an M?' said Alice.

'Why not?' said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into
a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with
a little shriek, and went on: '--that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?'

'Really, now you ask me,' said Alice, very much confused, 'I don't
think--'

'Then you shouldn't talk,' said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

'At any rate I'll never go THERE again!' said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. 'It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all
my life!'

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. 'That's very curious!' she thought. 'But
everything's curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.' And in
she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. 'Now, I'll manage better this time,' she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:
then she walked down the little passage: and THEN--she found herself at
last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool
fountains.




CHAPTER VIII. The Queen's Croquet-Ground

A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went
nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of
them say, 'Look out now, Five! Don't go splashing paint over me like
that!'

'I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; 'Seven jogged my
elbow.'

On which Seven looked up and said, 'That's right, Five! Always lay the
blame on others!'

'YOU'D better not talk!' said Five. 'I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

'What for?' said the one who had spoken first.

'That's none of YOUR business, Two!' said Seven.

'Yes, it IS his business!' said Five, 'and I'll tell him--it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.'

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun 'Well, of all the unjust
things--' when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and
all of them bowed low.

'Would you tell me,' said Alice, a little timidly, 'why you are painting
those roses?'

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, 'Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
So you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--' At this
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out 'The Queen! The Queen!' and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like
the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented
with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among
them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried
nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King's
crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand
procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; 'and besides, what would be the use of
a procession,' thought she, 'if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn't see it?' So she stood still where she was,
and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely 'Who is this?' She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

'Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, 'What's your name, child?'

'My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, 'Why, they're only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn't be afraid of them!'

'And who are THESE?' said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who
were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their
faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the
pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or
courtiers, or three of her own children.

'How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage. 'It's no
business of MINE.'

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed 'Off with her head! Off--'

'Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 'Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!'

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave 'Turn them
over!'

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

'Get up!' said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

'Leave off that!' screamed the Queen. 'You make me giddy.' And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, 'What HAVE you been doing here?'

'May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, 'we were trying--'

'I see!' said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
'Off with their heads!' and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

'You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

'Are their heads off?' shouted the Queen.

'Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers shouted
in reply.

'That's right!' shouted the Queen. 'Can you play croquet?'

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

'Yes!' shouted Alice.

'Come on, then!' roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

'It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

'Very,' said Alice: '--where's the Duchess?'

'Hush! Hush!' said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered 'She's under
sentence of execution.'

'What for?' said Alice.

'Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Rabbit asked.

'No, I didn't,' said Alice: 'I don't think it's at all a pity. I said
"What for?"'

'She boxed the Queen's ears--' the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. 'Oh, hush!' the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. 'The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said--'

'Get to your places!' shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs,
the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves
up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a
blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,
with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out
laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin
again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was
generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up
and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the
conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her head!' about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
'and then,' thought she, 'what would become of me? They're dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any one
left alive!'

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance
in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself
'It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.'

'How are you getting on?' said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. 'It's no use
speaking to it,' she thought, 'till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.' In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

'I don't think they play at all fairly,' Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, 'and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear
oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular;
at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you've no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the
arch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!'

'How do you like the Queen?' said the Cat in a low voice.

'Not at all,' said Alice: 'she's so extremely--' Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
'--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.'

The Queen smiled and passed on.

'Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and looking
at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

'It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice: 'allow me to
introduce it.'

'I don't like the look of it at all,' said the King: 'however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.'

'I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

'Don't be impertinent,' said the King, 'and don't look at me like that!'
He got behind Alice as he spoke.

'A cat may look at a king,' said Alice. 'I've read that in some book,
but I don't remember where.'

'Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, 'My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!'

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
'Off with his head!' she said, without even looking round.

'I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless
sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: 'but it doesn't
matter much,' thought Alice, 'as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.' So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less
than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last
remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but 'It belongs to the Duchess:
you'd better ask HER about it.'

'She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner: 'fetch her here.'
And the executioner went off like an arrow.

 The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle's Story

'You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!'
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's, and
they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

'When I'M a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone
though), 'I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,'
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of
rule, 'and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes
them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn't be so
stingy about it, you know--'

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 'You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can't
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.'

'Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

'Tut, tut, child!' said the Duchess. 'Everything's got a moral, if only
you can find it.' And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

'The game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.

''Tis so,' said the Duchess: 'and the moral of that is--"Oh, 'tis love,
'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'

'Somebody said,' Alice whispered, 'that it's done by everybody minding
their own business!'

'Ah, well! It means much the same thing,' said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added, 'and the moral
of THAT is--"Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves."'

'How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to herself.

'I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist,'
the Duchess said after a pause: 'the reason is, that I'm doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?'

'HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to
have the experiment tried.

'Very true,' said the Duchess: 'flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is--"Birds of a feather flock together."'

'Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

'Right, as usual,' said the Duchess: 'what a clear way you have of
putting things!'

'It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

'Of course it is,' said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; 'there's a large mustard-mine near here. And
the moral of that is--"The more there is of mine, the less there is of
yours."'

'Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,
'it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is.'

'I quite agree with you,' said the Duchess; 'and the moral of that
is--"Be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put more
simply--"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise."'

'I think I should understand that better,' Alice said very politely, 'if
I had it written down: but I can't quite follow it as you say it.'

'That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' the Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

'Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,' said
Alice.

'Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the Duchess. 'I make you a present
of everything I've said as yet.'

'A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad they don't give
birthday presents like that!' But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

'Thinking again?' the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.

'I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

'Just about as much right,' said the Duchess, 'as pigs have to fly; and
the m--'

But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died away, even
in the middle of her favourite word 'moral,' and the arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen
in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

'A fine day, your Majesty!' the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

'Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; 'either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!'

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

'Let's go on with the game,' the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would
cost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with
the other players, and shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her
head!' Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and
under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, 'Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?'

'No,' said Alice. 'I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

'It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said the Queen.

'I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

'Come on, then,' said the Queen, 'and he shall tell you his history,'

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the company generally, 'You are all pardoned.' 'Come, THAT'S a good
thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.
(IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) 'Up, lazy
thing!' said the Queen, 'and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with
the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on
the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go
after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. 'What fun!' said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

'What IS the fun?' said Alice.

'Why, SHE,' said the Gryphon. 'It's all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!'

'Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: 'I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!'

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. 'What is his sorrow?' she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, 'It's all his
fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on!'

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

'This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, 'she wants for to know your
history, she do.'

'I'll tell it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: 'sit
down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished.'

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, 'I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn't begin.' But
she waited patiently.

'Once,' said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, 'I was a real
Turtle.'

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of 'Hjckrrh!' from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, 'Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,' but she could
not help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

'When we were little,' the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, 'we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--'

'Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

'We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock Turtle
angrily: 'really you are very dull!'

'You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,'
added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said
to the Mock Turtle, 'Drive on, old fellow! Don't be all day about it!'
and he went on in these words:

'Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe it--'

'I never said I didn't!' interrupted Alice.

'You did,' said the Mock Turtle.

'Hold your tongue!' added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

'We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--'

'I'VE been to a day-school, too,' said Alice; 'you needn't be so proud
as all that.'

'With extras?' asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

'Yes,' said Alice, 'we learned French and music.'

'And washing?' said the Mock Turtle.

'Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

'Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the Mock Turtle in
a tone of great relief. 'Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,
"French, music, AND WASHING--extra."'

'You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; 'living at the bottom of
the sea.'

'I couldn't afford to learn it.' said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. 'I
only took the regular course.'

'What was that?' inquired Alice.

'Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' the Mock Turtle
replied; 'and then the different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

'I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say. 'What is it?'

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. 'What! Never heard of
uglifying!' it exclaimed. 'You know what to beautify is, I suppose?'

'Yes,' said Alice doubtfully: 'it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'

'Well, then,' the Gryphon went on, 'if you don't know what to uglify is,
you ARE a simpleton.'

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
turned to the Mock Turtle, and said 'What else had you to learn?'

'Well, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting off
the subjects on his flappers, '--Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.'

'What was THAT like?' said Alice.

'Well, I can't show it you myself,' the Mock Turtle said: 'I'm too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.'

'Hadn't time,' said the Gryphon: 'I went to the Classics master, though.
He was an old crab, HE was.'

'I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: 'he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'

'So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

'And how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said Alice, in a hurry to
change the subject.

'Ten hours the first day,' said the Mock Turtle: 'nine the next, and so
on.'

'What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

'That's the reason they're called lessons,' the Gryphon remarked:
'because they lessen from day to day.'

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. 'Then the eleventh day must have been a
holiday?'

'Of course it was,' said the Mock Turtle.

'And how did you manage on the twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

'That's enough about lessons,' the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
tone: 'tell her something about the games now.'




CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. 'Same as if he had a bone in his throat,'
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:--

'You may not have lived much under the sea--' ('I haven't,' said
Alice)--'and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--'
(Alice began to say 'I once tasted--' but checked herself hastily, and
said 'No, never') '--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!'

'No, indeed,' said Alice. 'What sort of a dance is it?'

'Why,' said the Gryphon, 'you first form into a line along the
sea-shore--'

'Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle. 'Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--'

'THAT generally takes some time,' interrupted the Gryphon.

'--you advance twice--'

'Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the Gryphon.

'Of course,' the Mock Turtle said: 'advance twice, set to partners--'

'--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the Gryphon.

'Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on, 'you throw the--'

'The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

'--as far out to sea as you can--'

'Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.

'Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

'Change lobsters again!' yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

'Back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

'It must be a very pretty dance,' said Alice timidly.

'Would you like to see a little of it?' said the Mock Turtle.

'Very much indeed,' said Alice.

'Come, let's try the first figure!' said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.
'We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?'

'Oh, YOU sing,' said the Gryphon. 'I've forgotten the words.'

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

 '"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
 "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.

 See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
 They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

 "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
 When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
 But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
 Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.

 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

 '"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
 "There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
 The further off from England the nearer is to France--
 Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"'

'Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said Alice, feeling
very glad that it was over at last: 'and I do so like that curious song
about the whiting!'

'Oh, as to the whiting,' said the Mock Turtle, 'they--you've seen them,
of course?'

'Yes,' said Alice, 'I've often seen them at dinn--' she checked herself
hastily.

'I don't know where Dinn may be,' said the Mock Turtle, 'but if you've
seen them so often, of course you know what they're like.'

'I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfully. 'They have their tails in
their mouths--and they're all over crumbs.'

'You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle: 'crumbs would all
wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the
reason is--' here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--'Tell her
about the reason and all that,' he said to the Gryphon.

'The reason is,' said the Gryphon, 'that they WOULD go with the lobsters
to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn't get
them out again. That's all.'

'Thank you,' said Alice, 'it's very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.'

'I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the Gryphon. 'Do you
know why it's called a whiting?'

'I never thought about it,' said Alice. 'Why?'

'IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. 'Does the boots and shoes!' she repeated
in a wondering tone.

'Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon. 'I mean, what
makes them so shiny?'

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. 'They're done with blacking, I believe.'

'Boots and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
'are done with a whiting. Now you know.'

'And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

'Soles and eels, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
'any shrimp could have told you that.'

'If I'd been the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on the song, 'I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep back, please: we
don't want YOU with us!"'

'They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle said: 'no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

'Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

'Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle: 'why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say "With what porpoise?"'

'Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

'I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added 'Come, let's hear some of YOUR adventures.'

'I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,' said
Alice a little timidly: 'but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.'

'Explain all that,' said the Mock Turtle.

'No, no! The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
'explanations take such a dreadful time.'

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about
her repeating 'YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,' to the Caterpillar, and the
words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said 'That's very curious.'

'It's all about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon.

'It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. 'I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.' He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.

'Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said the
Gryphon.

'How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!'
thought Alice; 'I might as well be at school at once.' However, she
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:--

  ''Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
  "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
  As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'

       [later editions continued as follows
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

'That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,' said the
Gryphon.

'Well, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; 'but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.'

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

'I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle.

'She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily. 'Go on with the next
verse.'

'But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted. 'How COULD he turn them
out with his nose, you know?'

'It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

'Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it
begins "I passed by his garden."'

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

  'I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'

    [later editions continued as follows
  The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
  When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
  While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
  And concluded the banquet--]

'What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,' the Mock Turtle
interrupted, 'if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far the most
confusing thing I ever heard!'

'Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

'Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?' the Gryphon went
on. 'Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?'

'Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,' Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
'Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old
fellow?'

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   'Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
   Waiting in a hot tureen!
   Who for such dainties would not stoop?
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

   'Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any other dish?
   Who would not give all else for two
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!'

'Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of 'The trial's beginning!' was heard in the
distance.

'Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

'What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered 'Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--

   'Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'




CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts?

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--'I wish they'd get the
trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round the refreshments!' But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. 'That's the judge,' she said to
herself, 'because of his great wig.'

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did
not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

'And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, 'and those twelve creatures,'
(she was obliged to say 'creatures,' you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) 'I suppose they are the jurors.' She said
this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew the meaning of it at all. However, 'jury-men' would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 'What are they
doing?' Alice whispered to the Gryphon. 'They can't have anything to put
down yet, before the trial's begun.'

'They're putting down their names,' the Gryphon whispered in reply, 'for
fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.'

'Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, 'Silence in the court!' and the
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who
was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down 'stupid things!' on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell
'stupid,' and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. 'A nice
muddle their slates'll be in before the trial's over!' thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was
obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was
of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

'Herald, read the accusation!' said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

   'The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
      And took them quite away!'

'Consider your verdict,' the King said to the jury.

'Not yet, not yet!' the Rabbit hastily interrupted. 'There's a great
deal to come before that!'

'Call the first witness,' said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three
blasts on the trumpet, and called out, 'First witness!'

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one
hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. 'I beg pardon, your
Majesty,' he began, 'for bringing these in: but I hadn't quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.'

'You ought to have finished,' said the King. 'When did you begin?'

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. 'Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,' he said.

'Fifteenth,' said the March Hare.

'Sixteenth,' added the Dormouse.

'Write that down,' the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

'Take off your hat,' the King said to the Hatter.

'It isn't mine,' said the Hatter.

'Stolen!' the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a
memorandum of the fact.

'I keep them to sell,' the Hatter added as an explanation; 'I've none of
my own. I'm a hatter.'

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

'Give your evidence,' said the King; 'and don't be nervous, or I'll have
you executed on the spot.'

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as there was room for her.

'I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. 'I can hardly breathe.'

'I can't help it,' said Alice very meekly: 'I'm growing.'

'You've no right to grow here,' said the Dormouse.

'Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly: 'you know you're growing
too.'

'Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse: 'not in that
ridiculous fashion.' And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the
other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, 'Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!' on
which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

'Give your evidence,' the King repeated angrily, 'or I'll have you
executed, whether you're nervous or not.'

'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
'--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--'

'The twinkling of the what?' said the King.

'It began with the tea,' the Hatter replied.

'Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said the King sharply. 'Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!'

'I'm a poor man,' the Hatter went on, 'and most things twinkled after
that--only the March Hare said--'

'I didn't!' the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

'You did!' said the Hatter.

'I deny it!' said the March Hare.

'He denies it,' said the King: 'leave out that part.'

'Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--' the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

'After that,' continued the Hatter, 'I cut some more bread-and-butter--'

'But what did the Dormouse say?' one of the jury asked.

'That I can't remember,' said the Hatter.

'You MUST remember,' remarked the King, 'or I'll have you executed.'

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. 'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he began.

'You're a very poor speaker,' said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

'I'm glad I've seen that done,' thought Alice. 'I've so often read
in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some attempts
at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court," and I never understood what it meant till now.'

'If that's all you know about it, you may stand down,' continued the
King.

'I can't go no lower,' said the Hatter: 'I'm on the floor, as it is.'

'Then you may SIT down,' the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

'Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought Alice. 'Now we shall get
on better.'

'I'd rather finish my tea,' said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the
Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

'You may go,' said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

'--and just take his head off outside,' the Queen added to one of the
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

'Call the next witness!' said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess's cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

'Give your evidence,' said the King.

'Shan't,' said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
'Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.'

'Well, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, 'What are tarts made of?'

'Pepper, mostly,' said the cook.

'Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.

'Collar that Dormouse,' the Queen shrieked out. 'Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!'

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

'Never mind!' said the King, with an air of great relief. 'Call the next
witness.' And he added in an undertone to the Queen, 'Really, my dear,
YOU must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead
ache!'

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
curious to see what the next witness would be like, '--for they haven't
got much evidence YET,' she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when
the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name 'Alice!'




CHAPTER XII. Alice's Evidence


'Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish
she had accidentally upset the week before.

'Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of
the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or
they would die.

'The trial cannot proceed,' said the King in a very grave voice, 'until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places--ALL,' he repeated with
great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; 'not that it signifies much,' she said
to herself; 'I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial
one way up as the other.'

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

'What do you know about this business?' the King said to Alice.

'Nothing,' said Alice.

'Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted the King.

'Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

'That's very important,' the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit
interrupted: 'UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,' he said in a
very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

'UNimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

'important--unimportant--unimportant--important--' as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.'
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
'but it doesn't matter a bit,' she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out 'Silence!' and read out from his book, 'Rule
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

Everybody looked at Alice.

'I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

'You are,' said the King.

'Nearly two miles high,' added the Queen.

'Well, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice: 'besides, that's not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.'

'It's the oldest rule in the book,' said the King.

'Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 'Consider your
verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

'There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said the White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; 'this paper has just been picked
up.'

'What's in it?' said the Queen.

'I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Rabbit, 'but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.'

'It must have been that,' said the King, 'unless it was written to
nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

'Who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen.

'It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit; 'in fact, there's
nothing written on the OUTSIDE.' He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and
added 'It isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.'

'Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of the jurymen.

'No, they're not,' said the White Rabbit, 'and that's the queerest thing
about it.' (The jury all looked puzzled.)

'He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

'Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, 'I didn't write it, and they
can't prove I did: there's no name signed at the end.'

'If you didn't sign it,' said the King, 'that only makes the matter
worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your
name like an honest man.'

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

'That PROVES his guilt,' said the Queen.

'It proves nothing of the sort!' said Alice. 'Why, you don't even know
what they're about!'

'Read them,' said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. 'Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?' he asked.

'Begin at the beginning,' the King said gravely, 'and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.'

These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--

   'They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
   She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

   He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
   If she should push the matter on,
    What would become of you?

   I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
   They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.

   If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
   He trusts to you to set them free,
    Exactly as we were.

   My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
   An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

   Don't let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
   A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me.'

'That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' said the
King, rubbing his hands; 'so now let the jury--'

'If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had grown so large
in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting
him,) 'I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe there's an atom of
meaning in it.'

The jury all wrote down on their slates, 'SHE doesn't believe there's an
atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to explain the paper.

'If there's no meaning in it,' said the King, 'that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't know,'
he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them
with one eye; 'I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. "--SAID
I COULD NOT SWIM--" you can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the
Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. 'Do I look like it?' he said. (Which he
certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

'All right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muttering over
the verses to himself: '"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--" that's the jury, of
course--"I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--" why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know--'

'But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said Alice.

'Why, there they are!' said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts
on the table. 'Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--"BEFORE SHE
HAD THIS FIT--" you never had fits, my dear, I think?' he said to the
Queen.

'Never!' said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as
it lasted.)

'Then the words don't FIT you,' said the King, looking round the court
with a smile. There was a dead silence.

'It's a pun!' the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,
'Let the jury consider their verdict,' the King said, for about the
twentieth time that day.

'No, no!' said the Queen. 'Sentence first--verdict afterwards.'

'Stuff and nonsense!' said Alice loudly. 'The idea of having the
sentence first!'

'Hold your tongue!' said the Queen, turning purple.

'I won't!' said Alice.

'Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

'Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
time.) 'You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

'Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; 'Why, what a long sleep you've
had!'

'Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had
finished, her sister kissed her, and said, 'It WAS a curious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late.' So
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and
this was her dream:--

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that
WOULD always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to
listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures
of her little sister's dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing
of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even
with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with
all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

              THE END

  BOOK I.

Of Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal tast
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of _Eden_, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heav’nly Muse, that on the secret top
Of _Oreb_, or of _Sinai_, didst inspire
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heav’ns and Earth
Rose out of _Chaos_: Or if _Sion_ Hill
Delight thee more, and _Siloa’s_ Brook that flow’d
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventrous Song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above th’ _Aonian_ Mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhime.
And chiefly Thou O Spirit, that dost prefer
Before all Temples th’ upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know’st; Thou from the first
Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like satst brooding on the vast Abyss
And mad’st it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support;
That to the highth of this great Argument
I may assert th’ Eternal Providence,
And justifie the wayes of God to men.

Say first, for Heav’n hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Mov’d our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favour’d of Heav’n so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his Will
For one restraint, Lords of the World besides?
Who first seduc’d them to that fowl revolt?
Th’ infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stird up with Envy and Revenge, deceiv’d
The Mother of Mankinde, what time his Pride
Had cast him out from Heav’n, with all his Host
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,
He trusted to have equal’d the most High,
If he oppos’d; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Rais’d impious War in Heav’n and Battel proud
With vain attempt.  Him the Almighty Power
Hurld headlong flaming from th’ Ethereal Skie
With hideous ruine and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who durst defie th’ Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquisht, rowling in the fiery Gulfe
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserv’d him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witness’d huge affliction and dismay
Mixt with obdurate pride and stedfast hate:
At once as far as Angels kenn he views
The dismal Situation waste and wilde,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flam’d, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Serv’d only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsum’d:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepar’d
For those rebellious, here their Prison ordain’d
In utter darkness, and their portion set
As far remov’d from God and light of Heav’n
As from the Center thrice to th’ utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, o’rewhelm’d
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltring by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in _Palestine_, and nam’d
_Beelzebub_.  To whom th’ Arch-Enemy,
And thence in Heav’n call’d Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.

If thou beest he; But O how fall’n! how chang’d
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Cloth’d with transcendent brightnes didst outshine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope,
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprize,
Joynd with me once, now misery hath joynd
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou seest
From what highth fal’n, so much the stronger provd
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms? yet not for those
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict do I repent or change,
Though chang’d in outward lustre; that fixt mind
And high disdain, from sence of injur’d merit,
That with the mightiest rais’d me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits arm’d
That durst dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power oppos’d
In dubious Battel on the Plains of Heav’n,
And shook his throne.  What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me.  To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deifie his power
Who from the terrour of this Arm so late
Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Empyreal substance cannot fail,
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanc’t,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal Warr
Irreconcileable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in th’ excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heav’n.

So spake th’ Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but rackt with deep despare:
And him thus answer’d soon his bold Compeer.

O Prince, O Chief of many Throned Powers,
That led th’ imbattelld Seraphim to Warr
Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endanger’d Heav’ns perpetual King;
And put to proof his high Supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event,
That with sad overthrow and foul defeat
Hath lost us Heav’n, and all this mighty Host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and Heav’nly Essences
Can Perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallow’d up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conquerour, (whom I now
Of force believe Almighty, since no less
Then such could hav orepow’rd such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength intire
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls
By right of Warr, what e’re his business be
Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire,
Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep;
What can it then avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminisht, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?
Whereto with speedy words th’ Arch-fiend reply’d.

Fall’n Cherube, to be weak is miserable
Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
To do ought good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist.  If then his Providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destind aim.
But see the angry Victor hath recall’d
His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the Gates of Heav’n: The Sulphurous Hail
Shot after us in storm, oreblown hath laid
The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
Of Heav’n receiv’d us falling, and the Thunder,
Wing’d with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip th’ occasion, whether scorn,
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
Seest thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde,
The seat of desolation, voyd of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful?  Thither let us tend
From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
There rest, if any rest can harbour there,
And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire Calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
If not what resolution from despare.

Thus Satan talking to his neerest Mate
With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes
That sparkling blaz’d, his other Parts besides
Prone on the Flood, extended long and large
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the Fables name of monstrous size,
_Titanian_, or _Earth-born_, that warr’d on _Jove_,
_Briarios_ or _Typhon_, whom the Den
By ancient _Tarsus_ held, or that Sea-beast
_Leviathan_, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th’ Ocean stream:
Him haply slumbring on the _Norway_ foam
The Pilot of some small night-founder’d Skiff,
Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell,
With fixed Anchor in his skaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night
Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delayes:
So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay
Chain’d on the burning Lake, nor ever thence
Had ris’n or heav’d his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enrag’d might see
How all his malice serv’d but to bring forth
Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shewn
On Man by him seduc’t, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance pour’d.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool
His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames
Drivn backward slope their pointing spires, & rowld
In billows, leave i’th’ midst a horrid Vale.
Then with expanded wings he stears his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky Air
That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land
He lights, if it were Land that ever burn’d
With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire;
And such appear’d in hue, as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a Hill
Torn from _Pelorus_, or the shatter’d side
Of thundring _Aetna_, whose combustible
And fewel’d entrals thence conceiving Fire,
Sublim’d with Mineral fury, aid the Winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involv’d
With stench and smoak: Such resting found the sole
Of unblest feet.  Him followed his next Mate,
Both glorying to have scap’t the _Stygian_ flood
As Gods, and by their own recover’d strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.

Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
Said then the lost Arch Angel, this the seat
That we must change for Heav’n, this mournful gloom
For that celestial light?  Be it so, since hee
Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
What shall be right: fardest from him is best
Whom reason hath equald, force hath made supream
Above his equals.  Farewel happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrours, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell
Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
A mind not to be chang’d by Place or Time.
The mind is its own place, and in it self
Can make a Heav’n of Hell, a Hell of Heav’n.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less then hee
Whom Thunder hath made greater?  Here at least
We shall be free; th’ Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choyce
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heav’n.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
Th’ associates and copartners of our loss
Lye thus astonisht on th’ oblivious Pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
Regaind in Heav’n, or what more lost in Hell?

So _Satan_ spake, and him _Beelzebub_
Thus answer’d.  Leader of those Armies bright,
Which but th’ Omnipotent none could have foyld,
If once they hear that voyce, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft
In worst extreams, and on the perilous edge
Of battel when it rag’d, in all assaults
Their surest signal, they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lye
Groveling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire,
As we erewhile, astounded and amaz’d,
No wonder, fall’n such a pernicious highth.

He scarce had ceas’t when the superiour Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield
Ethereal temper, massy, large and round,
Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb
Through Optic Glass the _Tuscan_ Artist views
At Ev’ning from the top of _Fesole_,
Or in _Valdarno_, to descry new Lands,
Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe.
His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine
Hewn on _Norwegian_ hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand,
He walkt with to support uneasie steps
Over the burning Marle, not like those steps
On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire;
Nathless he so endur’d, till on the Beach
Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and call’d
His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay intrans’t
Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strow the Brooks
In _Vallombrosa_, where th’ _Etrurian_ shades
High overarch’t imbowr; or scatterd sedge
Afloat, when with fierce Winds _Orion_ arm’d
Hath vext the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves orethrew
_Busiris_ and his _Memphian_ Chivalrie,
VVhile with perfidious hatred they pursu’d
The Sojourners of _Goshen_, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating Carkases
And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He call’d so loud, that all the hollow Deep
Of Hell resounded.  Princes, Potentates,
Warriers, the Flowr of Heav’n, once yours, now lost,
If such astonishment as this can sieze
Eternal spirits; or have ye chos’n this place
After the toyl of Battel to repose
Your wearied vertue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heav’n?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conquerour? who now beholds
Cherube and Seraph rowling in the Flood
With scatter’d Arms and Ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heav’n Gates discern
Th’ advantage, and descending tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulfe.
Awake, arise, or be for ever fall’n.

They heard, and were abasht, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceave the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their Generals Voyce they soon obeyd
Innumerable.  As when the potent Rod
Of _Amrams_ Son in _Egypts_ evill day
Wav’d round the Coast, up call’d a pitchy cloud
Of _Locusts_, warping on the Eastern Wind,
That ore the Realm of impious _Pharoah_ hung
Like Night, and darken’d all the Land of _Nile_:
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell
’Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires;
Till, as a signal giv’n, th’ uplifted Spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Thir course, in even ballance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain;
A multitude, like which the populous North
Pour’d never from her frozen loyns, to pass
_Rhene_ or the _Danaw_, when her barbarous Sons
Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath _Gibraltar_ to the _Lybian_ sands.
Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band
The Heads and Leaders thither hast where stood
Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms
Excelling human, Princely Dignities,
And Powers that earst in Heaven sat on Thrones;
Though of their Names in heav’nly Records now
Be no memorial, blotted out and ras’d
By thir Rebellion, from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the Sons of _Eve_
Got them new Names, till wandring ore the Earth,
Through Gods high sufferance for the tryal of man,
By falsities and lyes the greatest part
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and th’ invisible
Glory of him, that made them, to transform
Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorn’d
With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold,
And Devils to adore for Deities:
Then were they known to men by various Names,
And various Idols through the Heathen World.
Say, Muse, their Names then known, who first, who last,
Rous’d from the slumber, on that fiery Couch,
At thir great Emperors call, as next in worth
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous croud stood yet aloof?
The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on earth, durst fix
Their Seats long after next the Seat of God,
Their Altars by his Altar, Gods ador’d
Among the Nations round, and durst abide
_Jehovah_ thundring out of _Sion_, thron’d
Between the Cherubim; yea, often plac’d
Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profan’d,
And with their darkness durst affront his light.
First _Moloch_, horrid King besmear’d with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents tears,
Though for the noyse of Drums and Timbrels loud
Their childrens cries unheard, that past through fire
To his grim Idol.  Him the _Ammonite_
Worshipt in _Rabba_ and her watry Plain,
In _Argob_ and in _Basan_, to the stream
Of utmost _Arnon_.  Nor content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of _Solomon_ he led by fraud to build
His Temple right against the Temple of God
On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove
The pleasant Vally of _Hinnom_, _Tophet_ thence
And black _Gehenna_ call’d, the Type of Hell.
Next _Chemos_, th’ obscene dread of _Moabs_ Sons,
From _Aroer_ to _Nebo_, and the wild
Of Southmost _Abarim_; in _Hesebon_
And _Heronaim_, _Seons_ Realm, beyond
The flowry Dale of _Sibma_ clad with Vines,
And _Eleale_ to th’ _Asphaltick_ Pool.
_Peor_ his other Name, when he entic’d
_Israel_ in _Sittim_ on their march from _Nile_
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarg’d
Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove
Of _Moloch_ homicide, lust hard by hate;
Till good _Josiah_ drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they, who from the bordring flood
Of old _Euphrates_ to the Brook that parts
_Egypt_ from _Syrian_ ground, had general Names
Of _Baalim_ and _Ashtaroth_, those male,
These Feminine.  For Spirits when they please
Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their Essence pure,
Not ti’d or manacl’d with joynt or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose
Dilated or condens’t, bright or obscure,
Can execute their aerie purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfill.
For those the Race of _Israel_ oft forsook
Their living strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low
Bow’d down in Battel, sunk before the Spear
Of despicable foes.  With these in troop
Came _Astoreth_, whom the _Phoenicians_ call’d
_Astarte_, Queen of Heav’n, with crescent Horns;
To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon
_Sidonian_ Virgins paid their Vows and Songs,
In _Sion_ also not unsung, where stood
Her Temple on th’ offensive Mountain, built
By that uxorious King, whose heart though large,
Beguil’d by fair Idolatresses, fell
To Idols foul. _Thammuz_ came next behind,
Whose annual wound in _Lebanon_ allur’d
The _Syrian_ Damsels to lament his fate
In amorous dittyes all a Summers day,
While smooth _Adonis_ from his native Rock
Ran purple to the Sea, suppos’d with blood
Of _Thammuz_ yearly wounded: the Love-tale
Infected _Sions_ daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch
_Ezekiel_ saw, when by the Vision led
His eye survay’d the dark Idolatries
Of alienated _Judah_.  Next came one
Who mourn’d in earnest, when the Captive Ark
Maim’d his brute Image, head and hands lopt off
In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge,
Where he fell flat, and sham’d his Worshipers:
_Dagon_ his Name, Sea Monster, upward Man
And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high
Rear’d in _Azotus_, dreaded through the Coast
Of _Palestine_, in _Gath_ and _Ascalon_,
And _Accaron_ and _Gaza’s_ frontier bounds.
Him follow’d _Rimmon_, whose delightful Seat
Was fair _Damscus_, on the fertil Banks
Of _Abbana_ and _Pharphar_, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A Leper once he lost and gain’d a King,
_Ahaz_ his sottish Conquerour, whom he drew
Gods Altar to disparage and displace
For one of _Syrian_ mode, whereon to burn
His odious offrings, and adore the Gods
Whom he had vanquisht. After these appear’d
A crew who under Names of old Renown,
_Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_ and their Train
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abus’d
Fanatic _Egypt_ and her Priests, to seek
Thir wandring Gods disguis’d in brutish forms
Rather then human.  Nor did _Israel_ scape
Th’ infection when their borrow’d Gold compos’d
The Calf in _Oreb_: and the Rebel King
Doubl’d that sin in _Bethel_ and in _Dan_,
Lik’ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox,
_Jehovah_, who in one Night when he pass’d
From _Egypt_ marching, equal’d with one stroke
Both her first born and all her bleating Gods.
_Belial_ came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood
Or Altar smoak’d; yet who more oft then hee
In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest
Turns Atheist, as did _Ely’s_ Sons, who fill’d
With lust and violence the house of God.
In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns
And in luxurious Cities, where the noyse
Of riot ascends above thir loftiest Towrs,
And injury and outrage: And when Night
Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons
Of _Belial_, flown with insolence and wine.
Witness the Streets of _Sodom_, and that night
In _Gibeah_, when hospitable Dores
Yielded thir Matrons to prevent worse rape.
These were the prime in order and in might;
The rest were long to tell, though far renown’d,
Th’ _Ionian_ Gods, of _Javans_ Issue held
Gods, yet confest later then Heav’n and Earth
Thir boasted Parents; _Titian_ Heav’ns first born
With his enormous brood, and birthright seis’d
By younger _Saturn_, he from mightier _Jove_
His own and _Rhea’s_ Son like measure found;
So _Jove_ usurping reign’d: these first in _Creet_
And _Ida_ known, thence on the Snowy top
Of cold _Olympus_ rul’d the middle Air
Thir highest Heav’n; or on the _Delphian_ Cliff,
Or in _Dodona_, and through all the bounds
Of _Doric_ Land; or who with _Saturn_ old
Fled over _Adria_ to th’ _Hesperian_ Fields,
And ore the _Celtic_ roam’d the utmost Isles.
All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Down cast and damp, yet such wherein appear’d
Obscure som glimps of joy, to have found thir chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss it self; which on his count’nance cast
Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth not substance, gently rais’d
Their fainted courage, and dispel’d their fears.
Then strait commands that at the warlike sound
Of Trumpets loud and Clarions be upreard
His mighty Standard; that proud honour claim’d
_Azazel_ as his right, a Cherube tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurld
Th’ Imperial Ensign, which full high advanc’t
Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind
With Gemms and Golden lustre rich imblaz’d,
Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while
Sonorous mettal blowing Martial sounds:
At which the universal Host upsent
A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond
Frighted the Reign of _Chaos_ and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air
With Orient Colours waving: with them rose
A Forrest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms
Appear’d, and serried Shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move
In perfect _Phalanx_ to the Dorian mood
Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as rais’d
To highth of noblest temper Hero’s old
Arming to Battel, and in stead of rage
Deliberate valour breath’d, firm and unmov’d
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat,
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage
With solemn touches, troubl’d thoughts, and chase
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds.  Thus they
Breathing united force with fixed thought
Mov’d on in silence to soft Pipes that charm’d
Thir painful steps o’re the burnt soyle; and now
Advanc’t in view they stand, a horrid Front
Of dreadful length and dazling Arms, in guise
Of Warriers old with order’d Spear and Shield,
Awaiting what command thir mighty Chief
Had to impose: He through the armed Files
Darts his experienc’t eye, and soon traverse
The whole Battalion views, thir order due,
Thir visages and stature as of Gods,
Thir number last he summs.  And now his heart
Distends with pride, and hardning in his strength
Glories: For never since created man,
Met such imbodied force, as nam’d with these
Could merit more then that small infantry
Warr’d on by Cranes: though all the Giant brood
Of _Phlegra_ with th’ Heroic Race were joyn’d
That fought at _Theb’s_ and _Ilium_, on each side
Mixt with auxiliar Gods; and what resounds
In Fable or _Romance_ of _Uthers_ Son
Begirt with _British_ and _Armoric_ Knights;
And all who since, Baptiz’d or Infidel
Jousted in _Aspramont_ or _Montalban_,
_Damasco_, or _Marocco_, or _Trebisond_,
Or whom _Biserta_ sent from _Afric_ shore
When _Charlemain_ with all his Peerage fell
By _Fontarabbia_.  Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observ’d
Thir dread Commander: he above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent
Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost
All her Original brightness, nor appear’d
Less then Arch Angel ruind, and th’ excess
Of Glory obscur’d: As when the Sun new ris’n
Looks through the Horizontal misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon
In dim Eclips disastrous twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarchs.  Dark’n’d so, yet shon
Above them all th’ Arch Angel: but his face
Deep scars of Thunder had intrencht, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under Browes
Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemn’d
For ever now to have their lot in pain,
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerc’t
Of Heav’n, and from Eternal Splendors flung
For his revolt, yet faithfull how they stood,
Thir Glory witherd.  As when Heavens Fire
Hath scath’d the Forrest Oaks, or Mountain Pines,
With singed top their stately growth though bare
Stands on the blasted Heath.  He now prepar’d
To speak; whereat their doubl’d Ranks they bend
From Wing to Wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayd, and thrice in spite of scorn,
Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way.

O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
Matchless, but with th’ Almighty, and that strife
Was not inglorious, though th’ event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change
Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have fear’d,
How such united force of Gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet beleeve, though after loss,
That all these puissant Legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heav’n, shall faile to re-ascend
Self-rais’d, and repossess their native seat.
For me, be witness all the Host of Heav’n,
If counsels different, or danger shun’d
By me, have lost our hopes.  But he who reigns
Monarch in Heav’n, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custome, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still his strength conceal’d,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New warr, provok’t; our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heav’n that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
Thither, if but to prie, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
Caelestial Spirits in Bondage, nor th’ Abysse
Long under darkness cover.  But these thoughts
Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaird,
For who can think Submission?  Warr then, Warr
Open or understood must be resolv’d.

He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumin’d hell: highly they rag’d
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arm’s
Clash’d on their sounding shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heav’n.

There stood a Hill not far whose griesly top
Belch’d fire and rowling smoak; the rest entire
Shon with a glossie scurff, undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,
The work of Sulphur.  Thither wing’d with speed
A numerous Brigad hasten’d.  As when bands
Of Pioners with Spade and Pickaxe arm’d
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart.  _Mammon_ led them on,
_Mammon_, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heav’n, for ev’n in heav’n his looks & thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heav’ns pavement, trod’n Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoy’d
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransack’d the Center, and with impious hands
Rifl’d the bowels of thir mother Earth
For Treasures better hid.  Soon had his crew
Op’nd into the Hill a spacious wound
And dig’d out ribs of Gold.  Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soyle may best
Deserve the pretious bane.  And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondring tell
Of _Babel_, and the works of _Memphian_ Kings,
Learn how thir greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toyle
And hands innumerable scarce perform
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepar’d,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluc’d from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art founded the massie Ore,
Severing each kinde, and scum’d the Bullion dross:
A third as soon had form’d within the ground
A various mould, and from the boyling cells
By strange conveyance fill’d each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.
Anon out of the earth a Fabrick huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where _Pilasters_ round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures grav’n,
The Roof was fretted Gold.  Not _Babilon_,
Nor great _Alcairo_ such magnificence
Equal’d in all thir glories, to inshrine
_Belus_ or _Serapis_ thir Gods, or seat
Thir Kings, when _Aegypt_ with _Assyria_ strove
In wealth and luxurie.  Th’ ascending pile
Stood fixt her stately highth, and strait the dores
Op’ning thir brazen foulds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, o’re the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by suttle Magic many a row
Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and _Asphaltus_ yeilded light
As from a sky.  The hasty multitude
Admiring enter’d, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heav’n by many a Towred structure high,
Where Scepter’d Angels held thir residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Herarchie, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unador’d
In ancient Greece; and in _Ausonian_ land
Men call’d him _Mulciber_; and how he fell
From Heav’n, they fabl’d, thrown by angry _Jove_
Sheer o’re the Chrystal Battlements: from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropt from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On _Lemnos_ th’ _Aegaean_ Ile: thus they relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught avail’d him now
To have built in Heav’n high Towrs; nor did he scape
By all his Engins, but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Haralds by command
Of Sovran power, with awful Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Councel forthwith to be held
At _Pandaemonium_, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers: thir summons call’d
From every and Band squared Regiment
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was throng’d, the Gates
And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a cover’d field, where Champions bold
Wont ride in arm’d, and at the Soldans chair
Defi’d the best of Panim chivalry
To mortal combat or carreer with Lance)
Thick swarm’d, both on the ground and in the air,
Brusht with the hiss of russling wings.  As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Poure forth thir populous youth about the Hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Flie to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of thir Straw-built Cittadel,
New rub’d with Baume, expatiate and confer
Thir State affairs.  So thick the aerie crowd
Swarm’d and were straitn’d; till the Signal giv’n,
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race
Beyond the _Indian_ Mount, or Faerie Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forrest side
Or Fountain fome belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over head the Moon
Sits Arbitress, and neerer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on thir mirth & dance
Intent, with jocond Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduc’d thir shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court.  But far within
And in thir own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand Demy-Gods on golden seat’s,
Frequent and full.  After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.

      THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK II.

High on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshon the wealth of _Ormus_ and of _Ind_,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showrs on her Kings _Barbaric_ Pearl & Gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit rais’d
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain Warr with Heav’n, and by success untaught
His proud imaginations thus displaid.

Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav’n,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigor, though opprest and fall’n,
I give not Heav’n for lost.  From this descent
Celestial vertues rising, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Mee though just right, and the fixt Laws of Heav’n
Did first create your Leader, next, free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loss
Thus farr at least recover’d, hath much more
Establisht in a safe unenvied Throne
Yeilded with full consent.  The happier state
In Heav’n, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Formost to stand against the Thunderers aime
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in hell
Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more.  With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heav’n, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assur’d us; and by what best way,
Whether of open Warr or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak.

He ceas’d, and next him _Moloc_, Scepter’d King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heav’n; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with th’ Eternal to be deem’d
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Car’d not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reckd not, and these words thereafter spake.

My sentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now.
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingring here
Heav’ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Arm’d with Hell flames and fury all at once
O’re Heav’ns high Towrs to force resistless way,
Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engin he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixt with _Tartarean_ Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments.  But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumme not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse.  Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our brok’n Rear
Insulting, and pursu’d us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low?  Th’ ascent is easie then;
Th’ event is fear’d; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroy’d: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driv’n out from bliss, condemn’d
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing houre
Calls us to Penance?  More destroy’d then thus
We should be quite abolisht and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the highth enrag’d,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential, happier farr
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heav’n,
And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme,
Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.

He ended frowning, and his look denounc’d
Desperate revenge, and Battel dangerous
To less then Gods.  On th’ other side up rose
_Belial_, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heav’n; he seemd
For dignity compos’d and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropt Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleas’d the eare,
And with perswasive accent thus began.

I should be much for open Warr, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urg’d
Main reason to perswade immediate Warr,
Did not disswade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav’n are fill’d
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp thir Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprize.  Or could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heav’ns purest Light, yet our great Enemie
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and th’ Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious.  Thus repuls’d, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
Th’ Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowd up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies thir wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel Warr, we are decreed,
Reserv’d and destin’d to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain, pursu’d and strook
With Heav’ns afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seem’d
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay
Chain’d on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindl’d those grim fires
Awak’d should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the Flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance Arme again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were op’n’d, and this Firmament
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious Warr,
Caught in a fierie Tempest shall be hurl’d
Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
Warr therefore, open or conceal’d, alike
My voice disswades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heav’ns highth
All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the race of Heav’n
Thus trampl’d, thus expell’d to suffer here
Chains & these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolv’d,
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And vent’rous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of thir Conquerour: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supream Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov’d
Not mind us not offending, satisfi’d
With what is punish’t; whence these raging fires
Will slack’n, if his breath stir not thir flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Thir noxious vapour, or enur’d not feel,
Or chang’d at length, and to the place conformd
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow milde, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appeers
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.

Thus _Belial_ with words cloath’d in reasons garb
Counsel’d ignoble ease, and peaceful sloath,
Not peace: and after him thus _Mammon_ spake.

Either to disinthrone the King of Heav’n
We warr, if warr be best, or to regain
Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then
May hope, when everlasting Fate shall yeild
To fickle Chance, and _Chaos_ judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
Within Heav’ns bound, unless Heav’ns Lord supream
We overpower?  Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws impos’d, to celebrate his Throne
With warbl’d Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forc’t Halleluiah’s; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile offerings.  This must be our task
In Heav’n, this our delight; how wearisom
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtain’d
Unacceptable, though in Heav’n, our state
Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easie yoke
Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so e’re
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance.  This deep world
Of darkness do we dread?  How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heav’ns all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur’d,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar
Must’ring thir rage, and Heav’n resembles Hell?
As he our Darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please?  This Desart soile
Wants not her hidden lustre, Gemms and Gold;
Nor want we skill or art, from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heav’n shew more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
As soft as now severe, our temper chang’d
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain.  All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settl’d State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and where, dismissing quite
All thoughts of Warr: ye have what I advise.

He scarce had finisht, when such murmur filld
Th’ Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustring winds, which all night long
Had rous’d the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest: Such applause was heard
As _Mammon_ ended, and his Sentence pleas’d,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of _Michael_
Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By pollicy, and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heav’n.
Which when _Beelzebub_ perceiv’d, then whom,
_Satan_ except, none higher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem’d
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation sat and publick care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shon,
Majestick though in ruin: sage he stood
With _Atlantean_ shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.

Thrones and imperial Powers, off-spring of heav’n,
Ethereal Vertues; or these Titles now
Must we renounce, and changing stile be call’d
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heav’n hath doom’d
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heav’ns high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remaine
In strictest bondage, though thus far remov’d,
Under th’ inevitable curb, reserv’d
His captive multitude: For he, be sure,
In highth or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heav’n.
What sit we then projecting Peace and Warr?
Warr hath determin’d us, and foild with loss
Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none
Voutsaf’t or sought; for what peace will be giv’n
To us enslav’d, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hostility and hate,
Untam’d reluctance, and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conquerour least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoyce
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heav’n, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep.  What if we find
Some easier enterprize?  There is a place
(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heav’n
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of som new Race call’d _Man_, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favour’d more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounc’d among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That shook Heav’ns whol circumference, confirm’d.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endu’d, and what thir Power,
And where thir weakness, how attempted best,
By force or suttlety: Though Heav’n be shut,
And Heav’ns high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lye expos’d
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Som advantagious act may be achiev’d
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The punie habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that thir God
May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works.  This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise
In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurl’d headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Thir frail Originals, and faded bliss,
Faded so soon.  Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires.  Thus _Beelzebub_
Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devis’d
By _Satan_, and in part propos’d: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creatour?  But thir spite still serves
His glory to augment.  The bold design
Pleas’d highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkl’d in all thir eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.

Well have ye judg’d, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolv’d; which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spight of Fate,
Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heav’n; or else in some milde Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heav’ns fair Light
Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breath her balme.  But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandring feet
The dark unbottom’d infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight
Upborn with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Ile; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round?  Here he had need
All circumspection, and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.

This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspence, awaiting who appeer’d
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; & each
In others count’nance red his own dismay
Astonisht: none among the choice and prime
Of those Heav’n-warring Champions could be found
So hardie as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last
_Satan_, whom now transcendent glory rais’d
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmov’d thus spake.

O Progeny of Heav’n, Empyreal Thrones,
With reason hath deep silence and demurr
Seis’d us, though undismaid: long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to Light;
Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barr’d over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plung’d in that abortive gulf.
If thence he scape into what ever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sov’ranty, adorn’d
With splendor, arm’d with power, if aught propos’d
And judg’d of public moment, in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deterre
Me from attempting.  Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honourd sits?  Go therfore mighty powers,
Terror of Heav’n, though fall’n; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tollerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprize
None shall partake with me.  Thus saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution rais’d
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refus’d) what erst they feard;
And so refus’d might in opinion stand
His rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn.  But they
Dreaded not more th’ adventure then his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Thir rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote.  Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extoll him equal to the highest in Heav’n:
Nor fail’d they to express how much they prais’d,
That for the general safety he despis’d
His own: for neither do the Spirits damn’d
Loose all thir vertue; least bad men should boast
Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnisht o’re with zeal.
Thus they thir doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoycing in thir matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o’respread
Heav’ns chearful face, the lowring Element
Scowls ore the dark’nd lantskip Snow, or showre;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his ev’ning beam, the fields revive,
The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest thir joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men!  Devil with Devil damn’d
Firm concord holds, men onely disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmitie, and strife
Among themselves, and levie cruel warres,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes anow besides,
That day and night for his destruction waite.

The _Stygian_ Councel thus dissolv’d; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came thir mighty Paramount, and seemd
Alone th’ Antagonist of Heav’n, nor less
Then Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos’d
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of thir Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to thir mouths the sounding Alchymie
By Haralds voice explain’d: the hollow Abyss
Heard farr and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafning shout, return’d them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease thir minds and somwhat rais’d
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers
Disband, and wandring, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplext, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till his great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime
Upon the wing, or in swift race contend,
As at th’ Olympian Games or _Pythian_ fields;
Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.
As when to warn proud Cities warr appears
Wag’d in the troubl’d Skie, and Armies rush
To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van
Pric forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir spears
Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heav’n the welkin burns.
Others with vast _Typhoean_ rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar.
As when _Alcides_ from _Oealia_ Crown’d
With conquest, felt th’ envenom’d robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots _Thessalian_ Pines,
And _Lichas_ from the top of _Oeta_ threw
Into th’ _Euboic_ Sea.  Others more milde,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Thir own Heroic deeds and hapless fall
By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate
Free Vertue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Thir song was partial, but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience.  In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)
Others apart sat on a Hill retir’d,
In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will, and Fate,
Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandring mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argu’d then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophie:
Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th’ obdured brest
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yeild them easier habitation, bend
Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge
Into the burning Lake thir baleful streams;
Abhorred _Styx_ the flood of deadly hate,
Sad _Acheron_ of sorrow, black and deep;
_Cocytus_, nam’d of lamentation loud
Heard on the ruful stream; fierce _Phlegeton_
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Farr off from these a slow and silent stream,
_Lethe_ the River of Oblivion roules
Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that _Serbonian_ Bog
Betwixt _Damiata_ and mount _Casius_ old,
Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air
Burns frore, and cold performs th’ effect of Fire.
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail’d,
At certain revolutions all the damn’d
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice
Thir soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this _Lethean_ Sound
Both to and fro, thir sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so neer the brink;
But fate withstands, and to oppose th’ attempt
_Medusa_ with _Gorgonian_ terror guards
The Ford, and of it self the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of _Tantalus_.  Thus roving on
In confus’d march forlorn, th’ adventrous Bands
With shuddring horror pale, and eyes agast
View’d first thir lamentable lot, and found
No rest: through many a dark and drearie Vaile
They pass’d, and many a Region dolorous,
O’re many a Frozen, many a Fierie Alpe,
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death,
A Universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Abominable, inutterable, and worse
Then Fables yet have feign’d, or fear conceiv’d,
_Gorgons_ and _Hydra’s_, and _Chimera’s_ dire.

Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,
_Satan_ with thoughts inflam’d of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the Gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight; som times
He scours the right hand coast, som times the left,
Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soares
Up to the fiery concave touring high.
As when farr off at Sea a Fleet descri’d
Hangs in the Clouds, by _Aequinoctial_ Winds
Close sailing from _Bengala_, or the Iles
Of _Ternate_ and _Tidore_, whence Merchants bring
Thir spicie Drugs: they on the trading Flood
Through the wide _Ethiopian_ to the Cape
Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.  So seem’d
Farr off the flying Fiend: at last appeer
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof,
And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenitrable, impal’d with circling fire,
Yet unconsum’d.  Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seem’d Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fould
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent arm’d
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing bark’d
With wide _Cerberean_ mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturb’d thir noyse, into her woomb,
And kennel there, yet there still bark’d and howl’d
Within unseen.  Farr less abhorrd then these
Vex’d _Scylla_ bathing in the Sea that parts
_Calabria_ from the hoarce _Trinacrian_ shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call’d
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lur’d with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With _Lapland_ Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipses at thir charms.  The other shape,
If shape it might be call’d that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joynt, or limb,
Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,
For each seem’d either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem’d his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.
_Satan_ was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast,
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
Th’ undaunted Fiend what this might be admir’d,
Admir’d, not fear’d; God and his Son except,
Created thing naught vallu’d he nor shun’d;
And with disdainful look thus first began.

Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
That dar’st, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assur’d, without leave askt of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav’n.

To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply’d,
Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee,
Who first broke peace in Heav’n and Faith, till then
Unbrok’n, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Sons
Conjur’d against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemn’d
To waste Eternal daies in woe and pain?
And reck’n’st thou thy self with Spirits of Heav’n,
Hell-doomd, and breath’st defiance here and scorn,
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord?  Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue
Thy lingring, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seise thee, and pangs unfelt before.

So spake the grieslie terrour, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatning, grew ten fold
More dreadful and deform: on th’ other side
Incenc’t with indignation _Satan_ stood
Unterrifi’d, and like a Comet burn’d,
That fires the length of _Ophiucus_ huge
In th’ Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Pestilence and Warr.  Each at the Head
Level’d his deadly aime; thir fatall hands
No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at th’ other, as when two black Clouds
With Heav’ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the _Caspian_, then stand front to front
Hov’ring a space, till Winds the signal blow
To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air:
So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at thir frown, so matcht they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achiev’d, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Ris’n, and with hideous outcry rush’d between.

O Father, what intends thy hand, she cry’d,
Against thy only Son?  What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
Against thy Fathers head? and know’st for whom;
For him who sits above and laughs the while
At thee ordain’d his drudge, to execute
What e’re his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids,
His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.

She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore, then these to her _Satan_ return’d:

So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand
Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-form’d, and why
In this infernal Vaile first met thou call’st
Me Father, and that Fantasm call’st my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable then him and thee.

T’ whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate reply’d;
Hast thou forgot me then, and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair
In Heav’n, when at th’ Assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combin’d
In bold conspiracy against Heav’ns King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surpris’d thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side op’ning wide,
Likest to thee in shape and count’nance bright,
Then shining heav’nly fair, a Goddess arm’d
Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seis’d
All th’ Host of Heav’n; back they recoild affraid
At first, and call’d me _Sin_, and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleas’d, and with attractive graces won
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft
Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
Becam’st enamour’d, and such joy thou took’st
With me in secret, that my womb conceiv’d
A growing burden.  Mean while Warr arose,
And fields were fought in Heav’n; wherein remaind
(For what could else) to our Almighty Foe
Cleer Victory, to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driv’n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I also; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was giv’n, with charge to keep
These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my op’ning.  Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou seest
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transform’d: but he my inbred enemie
Forth issu’d, brandishing his fatal Dart
Made to destroy: I fled, and cry’d out _Death_;
Hell trembl’d at the hideous Name, and sigh’d
From all her Caves, and back resounded _Death_.
I fled, but he pursu’d (though more, it seems,
Inflam’d with lust then rage) and swifter far,
Me overtook his mother all dismaid,
And in embraces forcible and foule
Ingendring with me, of that rape begot
These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry
Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceiv’d
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me, for when they list into the womb
That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw
My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth
Afresh with conscious terrours vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim _Death_ my Son and foe, who sets them on,
And me his Parent would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involvd; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,
When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounc’d.
But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,
Though temper’d heav’nly, for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist.

She finish’d, and the suttle Fiend his lore
Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answerd smooth.
Dear Daughter, since thou claim’st me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heav’n, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know
I come no enemie, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain,
Both him and thee, and all the heav’nly Host
Of Spirits that in our just pretenses arm’d
Fell with us from on high: from them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
My self expose, with lonely steps to tread
Th’ unfounded deep, & through the void immense
To search with wandring quest a place foretold
Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round, a place of bliss
In the Pourlieues of Heav’n, and therein plac’t
A race of upstart Creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov’d,
Least Heav’n surcharg’d with potent multitude
Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught
Then this more secret now design’d, I haste
To know, and this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom Air, imbalm’d
With odours; there ye shall be fed and fill’d
Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.
He ceas’d, for both seemd highly pleasd, and Death
Grinnd horrible a gastly smile, to hear
His famine should be fill’d, and blest his mawe
Destin’d to that good hour: no less rejoyc’d
His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire.

The key of this infernal Pit by due,
And by command of Heav’ns all-powerful King
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These Adamantine Gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be o’rematcht by living might.
But what ow I to his commands above
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of _Tartarus_ profound,
To sit in hateful Office here confin’d,
Inhabitant of Heav’n, and heav’nlie-born,
Here in perpetual agonie and pain,
With terrors and with clamors compasst round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou
My being gav’st me; whom should I obey
But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.

Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And towards the Gate rouling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew,
Which but her self not all the _Stygian_ powers
Could once have mov’d; then in the key-hole turns
Th’ intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar
Of massie Iron or sollid Rock with ease
Unfast’ns: on a sudden op’n flie
With impetuous recoile and jarring sound
Th’ infernal dores, and on thir hinges great
Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of _Erebus_.  She op’nd, but to shut
Excel’d her power; the Gates wide op’n stood,
That with extended wings a Bannerd Host
Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through
With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth
Cast forth redounding smoak and ruddy flame.
Before thir eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark
Illimitable Ocean without bound,
Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth,
And time and place are lost; where eldest Night
And _Chaos_, Ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal _Anarchie_, amidst the noise
Of endless warrs and by confusion stand.
For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce
Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battel bring
Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag
Of each his faction, in thir several Clanns,
Light-arm’d or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumber’d as the Sands
Of _Barca_ or _Cyrene’s_ torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise
Thir lighter wings.  To whom these most adhere,
Hee rules a moment; _Chaos_ Umpire sits,
And by decision more imbroiles the fray
By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter
_Chance_ governs all.  Into this wilde Abyss,
The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,
Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all these in thir pregnant causes mixt
Confus’dly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless th’ Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more Worlds,
Into this wilde Abyss the warie fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and look’d a while,
Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to cross.  Nor was his eare less peal’d
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with small) then when _Bellona_ storms,
With all her battering Engines bent to rase
Som Capital City, or less then if this frame
Of Heav’n were falling, and these Elements
In mutinie had from her Axle torn
The stedfast Earth.  At last his Sail-broad Vannes
He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoak
Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League
As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides
Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuitie: all unawares
Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops
Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not by ill chance
The strong rebuff of som tumultuous cloud
Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him
As many miles aloft: that furie stay’d,
Quencht in a Boggie _Syrtris_, neither Sea,
Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile.
As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness
With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale,
Pursues the _Arimaspian_, who by stelth
Had from his wakeful custody purloind
The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend
Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes:
At length a universal hubbub wilde
Of stunning sounds and voices all confus’d
Born through the hollow dark assaults his eare
With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes,
Undaunted to meet there what ever power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the neerest coast of darkness lyes
Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne
Of _Chaos_, and his dark Pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthron’d
Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The consort of his Reign; and by them stood
_Orcus_ and _Ades_, and the dreaded name
Of _Demogorgon_; Rumor next and Chance,
And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.

T’ whom _Satan_ turning boldly, thus.  Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,
_Chaos_ and _Ancient Night_, I come no Spie,
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint
Wandring this darksome desart, as my way
Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,
Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek
What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds
Confine with Heav’n; or if som other place
From your Dominion won, th’ Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound, direct my course;
Directed, no mean recompence it brings
To your behoof, if I that Region lost,
All usurpation thence expell’d, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
(Which is my present journey) and once more
Erect the Standerd there of _Ancient Night_;
Yours be th’ advantage all, mine the revenge.

Thus _Satan_; and him thus the Anarch old
With faultring speech and visage incompos’d
Answer’d.  I know thee, stranger, who thou art,
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heav’ns King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard, for such a numerous host
Fled not in silence through the frighted deep
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heav’n Gates
Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands
Pursuing.  I upon my Frontieres here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve,
That little which is left so to defend
Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles
Weakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell
Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World
Hung ore my Realm, link’d in a golden Chain
To that side Heav’n from whence your Legions fell:
If that way be your walk, you have not farr;
So much the neerer danger; goe and speed;
Havock and spoil and ruin are my gain.

He ceas’d; and _Satan_ staid not to reply,
But glad that now his Sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacritie and force renew’d
Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire
Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting Elements, on all sides round
Environ’d wins his way; harder beset
And more endanger’d, then when _Argo_ pass’d
Through _Bosporus_ betwixt the justling Rocks:
Or when _Ulysses_ on the Larbord shunnd
_Charybdis_, and by th’ other whirlpool steard.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Mov’d on, with difficulty and labour hee;
But hee once past, soon after when man fell,
Strange alteration!  Sin and Death amain
Following his track, such was the will of Heav’n,
Pav’d after him a broad and beat’n way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf
Tamely endur’d a Bridge of wondrous length
From Hell continu’d reaching th’ utmost Orbe
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easie intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav’n
Shoots farr into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins
Her fardest verge, and _Chaos_ to retire
As from her outmost works a brok’n foe
With tumult less and with less hostile din,
That _Satan_ with less toil, and now with ease
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light
And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds
Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leasure to behold
Farr off th’ Empyreal Heav’n, extended wide
In circuit, undetermind square or round,
With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn’d
Of living Saphire, once his native Seat;
And fast by hanging in a golden Chain
This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr
Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon.
Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accurst, and in a cursed hour he hies.

      THE END OF THE SECOND BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK III.

Hail holy light, ofspring of Heav’n first-born,
Or of th’ Eternal Coeternal beam
May I express thee unblam’d? since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear’st thou rather pure Ethereal stream,
Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escap’t the _Stygian_ Pool, though long detain’d
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne
With other notes then to th’ _Orphean_ Lyre
I sung of _Chaos_ and _Eternal Night_,
Taught by the heav’nly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou
Revisit’st not these eyes, that rowle in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild.  Yet not the more
Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt
Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief
Thee _Sion_ and the flowrie Brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor somtimes forget
Those other two equal’d with me in Fate,
So were I equal’d with them in renown,
Blind _Thamyris_ and blind _Maeonides_,
And _Tiresias_ and _Phineus_ Prophets old.
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal Note.  Thus with the Year
Seasons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of Ev’n or Morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the chearful waies of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledg fair
Presented with a Universal blanc
Of Natures works to mee expung’d and ras’d,
And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou Celestial light
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.

Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure Empyrean where he sits
High Thron’d above all highth, bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as Starrs, and from his sight receiv’d
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his Glory sat,
His onely Son; On Earth he first beheld
Our two first Parents, yet the onely two
Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac’t,
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love
In blissful solitude; he then survey’d
Hell and the Gulf between, and _Satan_ there
Coasting the wall of Heav’n on this side Night
In the dun Air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet
On the bare outside of this World, that seem’d
Firm land imbosom’d without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future he beholds,
Thus to his onely Son foreseeing spake.

Onely begotten Son, seest thou what rage
Transports our adversarie, whom no bounds
Prescrib’d, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss
Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems
On desperat revenge, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head.  And now
Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way
Not farr off Heav’n, in the Precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created World,
And Man there plac’t, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or worse,
By som false guile pervert; and shall pervert;
For man will heark’n to his glozing lyes,
And easily transgress the sole Command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall
Hee and his faithless Progenie: whose fault?
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all th’ Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood & them who faild;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere
Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
Where onely what they needs must do, appeard,
Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessitie,
Not mee.  They therefore as to right belongd,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate;
As if Predestination over-rul’d
Thir will, dispos’d by absolute Decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed
Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less prov’d certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutablie foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formd them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change
Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain’d
Thir freedom, they themselves ordain’d thir fall.
The first sort by thir own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav’d: Man falls deceiv’d
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
Through Heav’n and Earth, so shall my glorie excel,
But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.

Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill’d
All Heav’n, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffus’d:
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious, in him all his Father shon
Substantially express’d, and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeerd,
Love without end, and without measure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father spake.

O Father, gracious was that word which clos’d
Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heav’n and Earth shall high extoll
Thy praises, with th’ innumerable sound
Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne
Encompass’d shall resound thee ever blest.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man
Thy creature late so lov’d, thy youngest Son
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd
With his own folly? that be from thee farr,
That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judge
Of all things made, and judgest onely right.
Or shall the Adversarie thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplish’t and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy self
Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glorie thou hast made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blaspheam’d without defence.

To whom the great Creatour thus reply’d.
O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All hast thou spok’n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpose hath decreed:
Man shall not quite be lost, but sav’d who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthrall’d
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fall’n condition is, and to me ow
All his deliv’rance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace
Elect above the rest; so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Thir sinful state, and to appease betimes
Th’ incensed Deitie, while offerd grace
Invites; for I will cleer thir senses dark,
What may suffice, and soft’n stonie hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endevord with sincere intent,
Mine eare shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire _Conscience_, whom if they will hear,
Light after light well us’d they shall attain,
And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be hard’nd, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
Disloyal breaks his fealtie, and sinns
Against the high Supremacie of Heav’n,
Affecting God-head, and so loosing all,
To expiate his Treason hath naught left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He with his whole posteritie must die,
Die hee or Justice must; unless for him
Som other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say Heav’nly Powers, where shall we find such love,
Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and just th’ unjust to save,
Dwels in all Heaven charitie so deare?

He ask’d, but all the Heav’nly Quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heav’n: on mans behalf
Patron or Intercessor none appeerd,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have bin lost, adjudg’d to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulness dwels of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewd.

Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor’d, unsought,
Happie for man, so coming; he her aide
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
Attonement for himself or offering meet,
Indebted and undon, hath none to bring:
Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life
I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;
Account mee man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glorie next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly die
Well pleas’d, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomie power I shall not long
Lie vanquisht; thou hast givn me to possess
Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yeild, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathsom grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soule
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
My Vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoile;
Death his deaths wound shall then receive, & stoop
Inglorious, of his mortall sting disarm’d.
I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound.  Thou at the sight
Pleas’d, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile,
While by thee rais’d I ruin all my Foes,
Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemd
Shall enter Heaven long absent, and returne,
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assur’d,
And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire.

His words here ended, but his meek aspect
Silent yet spake, and breath’d immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shon
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offer’d, he attends the will
Of his great Father.  Admiration seis’d
All Heav’n, what this might mean, & whither tend
Wondring; but soon th’ Almighty thus reply’d:

O thou in Heav’n and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou
My sole complacence! well thou know’st how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the least
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
Thou therefore whom thou only canst redeeme,
Thir Nature also to thy Nature joyne;
And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed,
By wondrous birth: Be thou in _Adams_ room
The Head of all mankind, though _Adams_ Son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee
As from a second root shall be restor’d,
As many as are restor’d, without thee none.
His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life.  So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfie for Man, be judg’d and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life.
So Heav’nly love shal outdoo Hellish hate,
Giving to death, and dying to redeeme,
So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
So easily destroy’d, and still destroyes
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shalt thou by descending to assume
Mans Nature, less’n or degrade thine owne.
Because thou hast, though Thron’d in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quitted all to save
A World from utter loss, and hast been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
Farr more then Great or High; because in thee
Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne;
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt Reigne
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King; all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriously from Heav’n
Shalt in the Skie appeer, and from thee send
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaime
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past Ages to the general Doom
Shall hast’n, such a peal shall rouse thir sleep.
Then all thy Saints assembl’d, thou shalt judge
Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell, her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut.  Mean while
The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell
And after all thir tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Scepter shalt lay by,
For regal Scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be All in All.  But all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honour him as mee.

No sooner had th’ Almighty ceas’t, but all
The multitude of Angels with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav’n rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna’s fill’d
Th’ eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Towards either Throne they bow, & to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold,
Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once
In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life
Began to bloom, but soon for mans offence
To Heav’n remov’d where first it grew, there grows,
And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life,
And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heavn
Rowls o’re _Elisian_ Flours her Amber stream;
With these that never fade the Spirits Elect
Bind thir resplendent locks inwreath’d with beams,
Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon
Impurpl’d with Celestial Roses smil’d.
Then Crown’d again thir gold’n Harps they took,
Harps ever tun’d, that glittering by their side
Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet
Of charming symphonie they introduce
Thir sacred Song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine
Melodious part, such concord is in Heav’n.

Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; thee Author of all being,
Fountain of Light, thy self invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit’st
Thron’d inaccessible, but when thou shad’st
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer,
Yet dazle Heav’n, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes.
Thee next they sang of all Creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous count’nance, without cloud
Made visible, th’ Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee
Impresst the effulgence of his Glorie abides,
Transfus’d on thee his ample Spirit rests.
Hee Heav’n of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created, and by thee threw down
Th’ aspiring Dominations: thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didst not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook
Heav’ns everlasting Frame, while o’re the necks
Thou drov’st of warring Angels disarraid.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime
Thee only extold, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man; him through their malice fall’n,
Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didst not doome
So strictly, but much more to pitie encline:
No sooner did thy dear and onely Son
Perceive thee purpos’d not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pitie enclin’d,
He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife
Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discern’d,
Regardless of the Bliss wherein hee sat
Second to thee, offerd himself to die
For mans offence.  O unexampl’d love,
Love no where to be found less then Divine!
Hail Son of God, Saviour of Men, thy Name
Shall be the copious matter of my Song
Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine.

Thus they in Heav’n, above the starry Sphear,
Thir happie hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe
Of this round World, whose first convex divides
The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos’d
From _Chaos_ and th’ inroad of Darkness old,
_Satan_ alighted walks: a Globe farr off
It seem’d, now seems a boundless Continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless expos’d, and ever-threatning storms
Of _Chaos_ blustring round, inclement skie;
Save on that side which from the wall of Heav’n
Though distant farr som small reflection gaines
Of glimmering air less vext with tempest loud:
Here walk’d the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a Vultur on _Imaus_ bred,
Whose snowie ridge the roving _Tartar_ bounds,
Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids
On Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs
Of _Ganges_ or _Hydaspes, Indian_ streams;
But in his way lights on the barren plaines
Of _Sericana_, where _Chineses_ drive
With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light:
So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend
Walk’d up and down alone bent on his prey,
Alone, for other Creature in this place
Living or liveless to be found was none,
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like Aereal vapours flew
Of all things transitorie and vain, when Sin
With vanity had filld the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or th’ other life;
All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits
Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal,
Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds;
All th’ unaccomplisht works of Natures hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixt,
Dissolvd on earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here,
Not in the neighbouring Moon, as some have dreamd;
Those argent Fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt th’ Angelical and Human kinde:
Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born
First from the ancient World those Giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renownd:
The builders next of _Babel_ on the Plain
Of _Sennaar_, and still with vain designe
New _Babels_, had they wherewithall, would build:
Others came single; hee who to be deemd
A God, leap’d fondly into _Aetna_ flames,
_Empedocles_, and hee who to enjoy
_Plato’s Elysium_, leap’d into the Sea,
_Cleombrotus_, and many more too long,
Embryo’s and Idiots, Eremits and Friers
White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie.
Here Pilgrims roam, that stray’d so farr to seek
In _Golgotha_ him dead, who lives in Heav’n;
And they who to be sure of Paradise
Dying put on the weeds of _Dominic_,
Or in _Franciscan_ think to pass disguis’d;
They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixt,
And that Crystalline Sphear whose ballance weighs
The Trepidation talkt, and that first mov’d;
And now Saint _Peter_ at Heav’ns Wicket seems
To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot
Of Heav’ns ascent they lift thir Feet, when loe
A violent cross wind from either Coast
Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry
Into the devious Air; then might ye see
Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers tost
And flutterd into Raggs, then Reliques, Beads,
Indulgences, Dispenses, Pardons, Bulls,
The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft
Fly o’re the backside of the World farr off
Into a _Limbo_ large and broad, since calld
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after, now unpeopl’d, and untrod;
All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he pass’d,
And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame
Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haste
His travell’d steps; farr distant hee descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high,
At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd
The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate
With Frontispice of Diamond and Gold
Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes
The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth
By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn.
The Stairs were such as whereon _Jacob_ saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of Guardians bright, when he from _Esau_ fled
To _Padan-Aram_ in the field of _Luz_,
Dreaming by night under the open Skie,
And waking cri’d, This is the Gate of Heav’n.
Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There alwaies, but drawn up to Heav’n somtimes
Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flow’d
Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon
Who after came from Earth, sayling arriv’d,
Wafted by Angels, or flew o’re the Lake
Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds.
The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easie ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the dores of Bliss.
Direct against which op’nd from beneath,
Just o’re the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to th’ Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by farr then that of after-times
Over Mount _Sion_, and, though that were large,
Over the _Promis’d Land_ to God so dear,
By which, to visit oft those happy Tribes,
On high behests his Angels to and fro
Pass’d frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From _Paneas_ the fount of _Jordans_ flood
To _Beersaba_, where the _Holy Land_
Borders on _Aegypt_ and the _Arabian_ shoare;
So wide the op’ning seemd, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave.
_Satan_ from hence now on the lower stair
That scal’d by steps of Gold to Heav’n Gate
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this World at once.  As when a Scout
Through dark and desart wayes with peril gone
All night; at last by break of chearful dawne
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some forein land
First-seen, or some renownd Metropolis
With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd,
Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams.
Such wonder seis’d, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit maligne, but much more envy seis’d
At sight of all this World beheld so faire.
Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling Canopie
Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point
Of _Libra_ to the fleecie Starr that bears
_Andromeda_ farr off _Atlantick_ Seas
Beyond th’ _Horizon_; then from Pole to Pole
He views in bredth, and without longer pause
Down right into the Worlds first Region throws
His flight precipitant, and windes with ease
Through the pure marble Air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable Starrs, that shon
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds,
Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Iles,
Like those _Hesperian_ Gardens fam’d of old,
Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales,
Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there
He stayd not to enquire: above them all
The golden Sun in splendor likest Heaven
Allur’d his eye: Thither his course he bends
Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe
By center, or eccentric, hard to tell,
Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie
Alooff the vulgar Constellations thick,
That from his Lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses Light from farr; they as they move
Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, towards his all-chearing Lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turnd
By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms
The Univers, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible vertue even to the deep:
So wondrously was set his Station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the Sun’s lucent Orbe
Through his glaz’d Optic Tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compar’d with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informd
With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire;
If mettal, part seemd Gold, part Silver cleer;
If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite,
Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon
In _Aarons_ Brest-plate, and a stone besides
Imagind rather oft then elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde
Volatil _Hermes_, and call up unbound
In various shapes old _Proteus_ from the Sea,
Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth _Elixir_ pure, and Rivers run
Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch
Th’ Arch-chimic Sun so farr from us remote
Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixt
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of colour glorious and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazl’d, farr and wide his eye commands,
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all Sun-shine, as when his Beams at Noon
Culminate from th’ _Aequator_, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire,
No where so cleer, sharp’nd his visual ray
To objects distant farr, whereby he soon
Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom _John_ saw also in the Sun:
His back was turnd, but not his brightness hid;
Of beaming sunnie Raies, a golden tiar
Circl’d his Head, nor less his Locks behind
Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round; on som great charge imploy’d
Hee seemd, or fixt in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandring flight
To Paradise the happie seat of Man,
His journies end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherube he appeers,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smil’d Celestial, and to every Limb
Sutable grace diffus’d, so well he feignd;
Under a Coronet his flowing haire
In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore
Of many a colourd plume sprinkl’d with Gold,
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a Silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turnd,
Admonisht by his eare, and strait was known
Th’ Arch-Angel _Uriel_, one of the seav’n
Who in Gods presence, neerest to his Throne
Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes
That run through all the Heav’ns, or down to th’ Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
O’re Sea and Land: him _Satan_ thus accostes;

_Uriel_, for thou of those seav’n Spirits that stand
In sight of God’s high Throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentic will
Interpreter through highest Heav’n to bring,
Where all his Sons thy Embassie attend;
And here art likeliest by supream decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye
To visit oft this new Creation round;
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All these his works so wondrous he ordaind,
Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandring.  Brightest Seraph tell
In which of all these shining Orbes hath Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none,
But all these shining Orbes his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with secret gaze,
Or open admiration him behold
On whom the great Creator hath bestowd
Worlds, and on whom hath all these graces powrd;
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The Universal Maker we may praise;
Who justly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes
To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss
Created this new happie Race of Men
To serve him better: wise are all his wayes.

So spake the false dissembler unperceivd;
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisie, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heav’n and Earth:
And oft though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicitie
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguil’d
_Uriel_, though Regent of the Sun, and held
The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heav’n;
Who to the fraudulent Impostor foule
In his uprightness answer thus returnd.
Faire Angel, thy desire which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to glorifie
The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps
Contented with report heare onely in heav’n:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance alwayes with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Thir number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid thir causes deep.
I saw when at his Word the formless Mass,
This worlds material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wilde uproar
Stood rul’d, stood vast infinitude confin’d;
Till at his second bidding darkness fled,
Light shon, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to thir several Quarters hasted then
The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire,
And this Ethereal quintessence of Heav’n
Flew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs
Numberless, as thou seest, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his course,
The rest in circuit walles this Universe.
Look downward on that Globe whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;
That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light
His day, which else as th’ other Hemisphere
Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon
(So call that opposite fair Starr) her aide
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heav’n;
With borrowd light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten th’ Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot to which I point is _Paradise_,
_Adams_ abode, those loftie shades his Bowre.
Thy way thou canst not miss, me mine requires.

Thus said, he turnd, and _Satan_ bowing low,
As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath,
Down from th’ Ecliptic, sped with hop’d success,
Throws his steep flight with many an Aerie wheele,
Nor staid, till on _Niphates_ top he lights.

       THE END OF THE THIRD BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK IV.

O For that warning voice, which he who saw
Th’ _Apocalyps_, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be reveng’d on men,
_Wo to the Inhabitants on Earth!_ that now,
While time was, our first Parents had bin warnd
The coming of thir secret foe, and scap’d
Haply so scap’d his mortal snare; for now
_Satan_, now first inflam’d with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere th’ Accuser of man-kind,
To wreck on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battel, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoycing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rowling, boiles in his tumultuous brest,
And like a devillish Engine back recoiles
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract
His troubl’d thoughts, and from the bottom stirr
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memorie
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards _Eden_ which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad,
Sometimes towards Heav’n and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Towre:
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.

O thou that with surpassing Glory crownd,
Look’st from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Starrs
Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heav’n against Heav’ns matchless King:
Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good prov’d ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burthensome, still paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still receivd,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and dischargd; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordaind
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stood
Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais’d
Ambition.  Yet why not? som other Power
As great might have aspir’d, and me though mean
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshak’n, from within
Or from without, to all temptations arm’d.
Hadst thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to accuse,
But Heav’ns free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay curs’d be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I flie
Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire?
Which way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatning to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav’n.
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
_Disdain_ forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc’d
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
Th’ Omnipotent.  Ay me, they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vaine,
Under what torments inwardly I groane;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem and Scepter high advanc’d
The lower still I fall, onely Supream
In miserie; such joy Ambition findes.
But say I could repent and could obtaine
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would highth recal high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feign’d submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have peirc’d so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase deare
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as farr
From granting hee, as I from begging peace:
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us out-cast, exil’d, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farwel Hope, and with Hope farwel Fear,
Farwel Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heav’ns King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reigne;
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.

Thus while he spake, each passion dimm’d his face
Thrice chang’d with pale, ire, envie and despair,
Which marrd his borrow’d visage, and betraid
Him counterfet, if any eye beheld.
For heav’nly mindes from such distempers foule
Are ever cleer.  Whereof hee soon aware,
Each perturbation smooth’d with outward calme,
Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practisd falshood under saintly shew,
Deep malice to conceale, couch’t with revenge:
Yet not anough had practisd to deceive
_Uriel_ once warnd; whose eye pursu’d him down
The way he went, and on th’ _Assyrian_ mount
Saw him disfigur’d, more then could befall
Spirit of happie sort: his gestures fierce
He markd and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he suppos’d, all unobserv’d, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes
Of _Eden_, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champain head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides
With thicket overgrown, grottesque and wilde,
Access deni’d; and over head up grew
Insuperable highth of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm,
A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woodie Theatre
Of stateliest view.  Yet higher then thir tops
The verdurous wall of Paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into his neather Empire neighbouring round.
And higher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees loaden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appeerd, with gay enameld colours mixt:
On which the Sun more glad impress’d his beams
Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
When God hath showrd the earth; so lovely seemd
That Lantskip: And of pure now purer aire
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning thir odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmie spoiles.  As when to them who saile
Beyond the _Cape of Hope_, and now are past
_Mozambic_, off at Sea North-East windes blow
_Sabean_ Odours from the spicie shoare
Of _Arabie_ the blest, with such delay
Well pleas’d they slack thir course, and many a League
Cheard with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came thir bane, though with them better pleas’d
Then _Asmodeus_ with the fishie fume,
That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse
Of _Tobits_ Son, and with a vengeance sent
From _Media_ post to _Aegypt_, there fast bound.

Now to th’ ascent of that steep savage Hill
_Satan_ had journied on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwin’d,
As one continu’d brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplext
All path of Man or Beast that past that way:
One Gate there onely was, and that look’d East
On th’ other side: which when th’ arch-fellon saw
Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt,
At one slight bound high overleap’d all bound
Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling Wolfe,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where Shepherds pen thir Flocks at eeve
In hurdl’d Cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps o’re the fence with ease into the Fould:
Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash
Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial dores,
Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbes, or o’re the tiles;
So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould:
So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climbe.
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life,
The middle Tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life
Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death
To them who liv’d; nor on the vertue thought
Of that life-giving Plant, but only us’d
For prospect, what well us’d had bin the pledge
Of immortalitie.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to thir meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views
To all delight of human sense expos’d
In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise
Of God the Garden was, by him in the East
Of _Eden_ planted; _Eden_ stretchd her Line
From _Auran_ Eastward to the Royal Towrs
Of great _Seleucia_, built by _Grecian_ Kings,
Or where the Sons of _Eden_ long before
Dwelt in _Telassar:_ in this pleasant soile
His farr more pleasant Garden God ordaind;
Out of the fertil ground he caus’d to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life
Our Death the Tree of Knowledge grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through _Eden_ went a River large,
Nor chang’d his course, but through the shaggie hill
Pass’d underneath ingulft, for God had thrown
That Mountain as his Garden mould high rais’d
Upon the rapid current, which through veins
Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn,
Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill
Waterd the Garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the neather Flood,
Which from his darksom passage now appeers,
And now divided into four main Streams,
Runs divers, wandring many a famous Realme
And Country whereof here needs no account,
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that Saphire Fount the crisped Brooks,
Rowling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold,
With mazie error under pendant shades
Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art
In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon
Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plaine,
Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierc’t shade
Imbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place,
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balme,
Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rinde
Hung amiable, _Hesperian_ Fables true,
If true, here onely, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks
Grasing the tender herb, were interpos’d,
Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap
Of som irriguous Valley spread her store,
Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose:
Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves
Of coole recess, o’re which the mantling Vine
Layes forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, disperst, or in a Lake,
That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crownd,
Her chrystall mirror holds, unite thir streams.
The Birds thir quire apply; aires, vernal aires,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while Universal _Pan_
Knit with the _Graces_ and the _Hours_ in dance
Led on th’ Eternal Spring.  Not that faire field
Of _Enna_, where _Proserpin_ gathring flours
Her self a fairer Floure by gloomie _Dis_
Was gatherd, which cost _Ceres_ all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove
Of _Daphne_ by _Orontes_, and th’ inspir’d
_Castalian_ Spring might with this Paradise
Of _Eden_ strive; nor that _Nyseian_ Ile
Girt with the River _Triton_, where old _Cham_,
Whom Gentiles _Ammon_ call and _Libyan Jove_,
Hid _Amalthea_ and her Florid Son
Young _Bacchus_ from his Stepdame _Rhea’s_ eye;
Nor where _Abassin_ Kings thir issue Guard,
Mount _Amara_, though this by som suppos’d
True Paradise under the _Ethiop_ Line
By _Nilus_ head, enclos’d with shining Rock,
A whole dayes journey high, but wide remote
From this _Assyrian_ Garden, where the Fiend
Saw undelighted all delight, all kind
Of living Creatures new to sight and strange:
Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native Honour clad
In naked Majestie seemd Lords of all,
And worthie seemd, for in thir looks Divine
The image of thir glorious Maker shon,
Truth, Wisdome, Sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe, but in true filial freedom plac’t;
Whence true autoritie in men; though both
Not equal, as thir sex not equal seemd;
For contemplation hee and valour formd,
For softness shee and sweet attractive Grace,
Hee for God only, shee for God in him:
His fair large Front and Eye sublime declar’d
Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
Shee as a vail down to the slender waste
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets wav’d
As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli’d
Subjection, but requir’d with gentle sway,
And by her yeilded, by him best receivd,
Yeilded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet reluctant amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald,
Then was not guiltie shame, dishonest shame
Of natures works, honor dishonorable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubl’d all mankind
With shews instead, meer shews of seeming pure,
And banisht from mans life his happiest life,
Simplicitie and spotless innocence.
So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight
Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair
That ever since in loves imbraces met,
_Adam_ the goodliest man of men since borne
His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters _Eve_.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side
They sat them down, and after no more toil
Of thir sweet Gardning labour then suffic’d
To recommend coole _Zephyr_, and made ease
More easie, wholsom thirst and appetite
More grateful, to thir Supper Fruits they fell,
Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughes
Yeilded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours:
The savourie pulp they chew, and in the rinde
Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems
Fair couple, linkt in happie nuptial League,
Alone as they.  About them frisking playd
All Beasts of th’ Earth, since wilde, and of all chase
In Wood or Wilderness, Forrest or Den;
Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw
Dandl’d the Kid; Bears, Tygers, Ounces, Pards
Gambold before them, th’ unwieldy Elephant
To make them mirth us’d all his might, & wreathd
His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His breaded train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Coucht, and now fild with pasture gazing sat,
Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun
Declin’d was hasting now with prone carreer
To th’ Ocean Iles, and in th’ ascending Scale
Of Heav’n the Starrs that usher Evening rose:
When _Satan_ still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad.

O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold,
Into our room of bliss thus high advanc’t
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heav’nly Spirits bright
Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them Divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formd them on thir shape hath pourd.
Ah gentle pair, yee little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish and deliver ye to woe,
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happie, but for so happie ill secur’d
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heav’n
Ill fenc’t for Heav’n to keep out such a foe
As now is enterd; yet no purpos’d foe
To you whom I could pittie thus forlorne
Though I unpittied: League with you I seek,
And mutual amitie so streight, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling haply may not please
Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such
Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfould,
To entertain you two, her widest Gates,
And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous ofspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wrongd.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just,
Honour and Empire with revenge enlarg’d,
By conquering this new World, compels me now
To do what else though damnd I should abhorre.

So spake the Fiend, and with necessitie,
The Tyrants plea, excus’d his devilish deeds.
Then from his loftie stand on that high Tree
Down he alights among the sportful Herd
Of those fourfooted kindes, himself now one,
Now other, as thir shape servd best his end
Neerer to view his prey, and unespi’d
To mark what of thir state he more might learn
By word or action markt: about them round
A Lion now he stalkes with fierie glare,
Then as a Tiger, who by chance hath spi’d
In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play,
Strait couches close, then rising changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground
Whence rushing he might surest seise them both
Grip’t in each paw: when _Adam_ first of men
To first of women _Eve_ thus moving speech,
Turnd him all eare to heare new utterance flow.

Sole partner and sole part of all these joyes,
Dearer thy self then all; needs must the Power
That made us, and for us this ample World
Be infinitly good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite,
That rais’d us from the dust and plac’t us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can performe
Aught whereof hee hath need, hee who requires
From us no other service then to keep
This one, this easie charge, of all the Trees
In Paradise that beare delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that onely Tree
Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,
So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,
Som dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst
God hath pronounc’t it death to taste that Tree,
The only sign of our obedience left
Among so many signes of power and rule
Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv’n
Over all other Creatures that possesse
Earth, Aire, and Sea.  Then let us not think hard
One easie prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extoll
His bountie, following our delightful task
To prune these growing Plants, & tend these Flours,
Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet.

To whom thus Eve repli’d.  O thou for whom
And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my Guide
And Head, what thou hast said is just and right.
For wee to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy
So farr the happier Lot, enjoying thee
Preeminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thy self canst no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awak’t, and found my self repos’d
Under a shade on flours, much wondring where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issu’d from a Cave and spread
Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmov’d
Pure as th’ expanse of Heav’n; I thither went
With unexperienc’t thought, and laid me downe
On the green bank, to look into the cleer
Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Skie.
As I bent down to look, just opposite,
A Shape within the watry gleam appeerd
Bending to look on me, I started back,
It started back, but pleasd I soon returnd,
Pleas’d it returnd as soon with answering looks
Of sympathie and love, there I had fixt
Mine eyes till now, and pin’d with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou seest,
What there thou seest fair Creature is thy self,
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow staies
Thy coming, and thy soft imbraces, hee
Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy
Inseparablie thine, to him shalt beare
Multitudes like thy self, and thence be call’d
Mother of human Race: what could I doe,
But follow strait, invisibly thus led?
Till I espi’d thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a Platan, yet methought less faire,
Less winning soft, less amiablie milde,
Then that smooth watry image; back I turnd,
Thou following cryd’st aloud, Return fair _Eve_,
Whom fli’st thou? whom thou fli’st, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, neerest my heart
Substantial Life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear;
Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half: with that thy gentle hand
Seisd mine, I yeilded, and from that time see
How beauty is excelld by manly grace
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.

So spake our general Mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreprov’d,
And meek surrender, half imbracing leand
On our first Father, half her swelling Breast
Naked met his under the flowing Gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms
Smil’d with superior Love, as _Jupiter_
On _Juno_ smiles, when he impregns the Clouds
That shed _May_ Flowers; and press’d her Matron lip
With kisses pure: aside the Devil turnd
For envie, yet with jealous leer maligne
Ey’d them askance, and to himself thus plaind.

Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
Imparadis’t in one anothers arms
The happier _Eden_, shall enjoy thir fill
Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfill’d with pain of longing pines;
Yet let me not forget what I have gain’d
From thir own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge call’d,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd’n?
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should thir Lord
Envie them that? can it be sin to know,
Can it be death? and do they onely stand
By Ignorance, is that thir happie state,
The proof of thir obedience and thir faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Thir ruine!  Hence I will excite thir minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with designe
To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This Garden, and no corner leave unspi’d;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandring Spirit of Heav’n, by Fountain side,
Or in thick shade retir’d, from him to draw
What further would be learnt.  Live while ye may,
Yet happie pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.

So saying, his proud step he scornful turn’d,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o’re hil, o’re dale his roam.
Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heav’n
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern Gate of Paradise
Leveld his eevning Rayes: it was a Rock
Of Alablaster, pil’d up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous farr, winding with one ascent
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climbe.
Betwixt these rockie Pillars _Gabriel_ sat
Chief of th’ Angelic Guards, awaiting night;
About him exercis’d Heroic Games
Th’ unarmed Youth of Heav’n, but nigh at hand
Celestial Armourie, Shields, Helmes, and Speares
Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.
Thither came _Uriel_, gliding through the Eeven
On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr
In _Autumn_ thwarts the night, when vapors fir’d
Impress the Air, and shews the Mariner
From what point of his Compass to beware
Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.

_Gabriel_, to thee thy cours by Lot hath giv’n
Charge and strict watch that to this happie place
No evil thing approach or enter in;
This day at highth of Noon came to my Spheare
A Spirit, zealous, as he seem’d, to know
More of th’ Almighties works, and chiefly Man
Gods latest Image: I describ’d his way
Bent all on speed, and markt his Aerie Gate;
But in the Mount that lies from _Eden_ North,
Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks
Alien from Heav’n, with passions foul obscur’d:
Mine eye pursu’d him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him; one of the banisht crew
I fear, hath ventur’d from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.

To whom the winged Warriour thus returnd:
_Uriel_, no wonder if thy perfet sight,
Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sitst,
See farr and wide: in at this Gate none pass
The vigilance here plac’t, but such as come
Well known from Heav’n; and since Meridian hour
No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have oreleapt these earthie bounds
On purpose, hard thou knowst it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal barr.
But if within the circuit of these walks
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou telst, by morrow dawning I shall know.

So promis’d hee, and _Uriel_ to his charge
Returnd on that bright beam, whose point now raisd
Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fall’n
Beneath th’ _Azores_; whither the prime Orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rowl’d
Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth
By shorter flight to th’ East, had left him there
Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold
The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend:
Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober Liverie all things clad;
Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird,
They to thir grassie Couch, these to thir Nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleas’d: now glow’d the Firmament
With living Saphirs: _Hesperus_ that led
The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon
Rising in clouded Majestie, at length
Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light,
And o’re the dark her Silver Mantle threw.

When _Adam_ thus to _Eve_: Fair Consort, th’ hour
Of night, and all things now retir’d to rest
Mind us of like repose, since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night to men
Successive, and the timely dew of sleep
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines
Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long
Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his Dignitie,
And the regard of Heav’n on all his waies;
While other Animals unactive range,
And of thir doings God takes no account.
Tomorrow ere fresh Morning streak the East
With first approach of light, we must be ris’n,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green,
Our walks at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands then ours to lop thir wanton growth:
Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms,
That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.

To whom thus _Eve_ with perfet beauty adornd.
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargu’d I obey; so God ordains,
God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more
Is womans happiest knowledge and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time,
All seasons and thir change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun
When first on this delightful Land he spreads
His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour,
Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertil earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Eevning milde, then silent Night
With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon,
And these the Gemms of Heav’n, her starrie train:
But neither breath of Morn when she ascends
With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, floure,
Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers,
Nor grateful Evening mild, nor silent Night
With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon,
Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet.
But wherfore all night long shine these, for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?

To whom our general Ancestor repli’d.
Daughter of God and Man, accomplisht _Eve_,
Those have thir course to finish, round the Earth,
By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land
In order, though to Nations yet unborn,
Ministring light prepar’d, they set and rise;
Least total darkness should by Night regaine
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things, which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heate
Of various influence foment and warme,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Thir stellar vertue on all kinds that grow
On Earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,
That heav’n would want spectators, God want praise;
Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceasless praise his works behold
Both day and night: how often from the steep
Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note
Singing thir great Creator: oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk
With Heav’nly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonic number joind, thir songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.

Thus talking hand in hand alone they pass’d
On to thir blissful Bower; it was a place
Chos’n by the sovran Planter, when he fram’d
All things to mans delightful use; the roofe
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and Mirtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
_Acanthus_, and each odorous bushie shrub
Fenc’d up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour,
_Iris_ all hues, Roses, and Gessamin
Rear’d high thir flourisht heads between, and wrought
Mosaic; underfoot the Violet,
Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay
Broiderd the ground, more colour’d then with stone
Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here
Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none;
Such was thir awe of man.  In shadier Bower
More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd,
_Pan_ or _Silvanus_ never slept, nor Nymph,
Nor _Faunus_ haunted.  Here in close recess
With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs
Espoused _Eve_ deckt first her Nuptial Bed,
And heav’nly Quires the Hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our Sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorn’d,
More lovely then _Pandora_, whom the Gods
Endowd with all thir gifts, and O too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser Son
Of _Japhet_ brought by _Hermes_, she ensnar’d
Mankind with her faire looks, to be aveng’d
On him who had stole _Joves_ authentic fire.

Thus at thir shadie Lodge arriv’d, both stood,
Both turnd, and under op’n Skie ador’d
The God that made both Skie, Air, Earth & Heav’n
Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe
And starrie Pole: Thou also mad’st the Night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,
Which we in our appointed work imployd
Have finisht happie in our mutual help
And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss
Ordain’d by thee, and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou hast promis’d from us two a Race
To fill the Earth, who shall with us extoll
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.

This said unanimous, and other Rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into thir inmost bower
Handed they went; and eas’d the putting off
These troublesom disguises which wee wear,
Strait side by side were laid, nor turnd I weene
_Adam_ from his fair Spouse, nor _Eve_ the Rites
Mysterious of connubial Love refus’d:
Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of puritie and place and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to som, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Haile wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source
Of human ofspring, sole proprietie,
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driv’n from men
Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee
Founded in Reason, Loyal, Just, and Pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Farr be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose Bed is undefil’d and chast pronounc’t,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs us’d.
Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard,
Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours
Mixt Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starv’d Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept,
And on thir naked limbs the flourie roof
Showrd Roses, which the Morn repair’d.  Sleep on,
Blest pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.

Now had night measur’d with her shaddowie Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from thir Ivorie Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at th’ accustomd hour stood armd
To thir night watches in warlike Parade,
When _Gabriel_ to his next in power thus spake.

_Uzziel_, half these draw off, and coast the South
With strictest watch; these other wheel the North,
Our circuit meets full West.  As flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.
From these, two strong and suttle Spirits he calld
That neer him stood, and gave them thus in charge.

_Ithuriel_ and _Zephon_, with wingd speed
Search through this Garden, leav unsearcht no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harme.
This Eevning from the Sun’s decline arriv’d
Who tells of som infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escap’d
The barrs of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring.

So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Daz’ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the eare of _Eve_;
Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancie, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
Th’ animal Spirits that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At least distemperd, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aimes, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride.
Him thus intent _Ithuriel_ with his Spear
Touch’d lightly; for no falshood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discoverd and surpriz’d.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun som Magazin to store
Against a rumord Warr, the Smuttie graine
With sudden blaze diffus’d, inflames the Aire:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stept those two fair Angels half amaz’d
So sudden to behold the grieslie King;
Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon.

Which of those rebell Spirits adjudg’d to Hell
Com’st thou, escap’d thy prison, and transform’d,
Why satst thou like an enemie in waite
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?

Know ye not then said _Satan_, filld with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soare;
Not to know mee argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus _Zephon_, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminisht brightness, to be known
As when thou stoodst in Heav’n upright and pure;
That Glorie then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembl’st now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foule.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.

So spake the Cherube, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beautie, added grace
Invincible: abasht the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Vertue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pin’d
His loss; but chiefly to find here observd
His lustre visibly impar’d; yet seemd
Undaunted.  If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glorie will be wonn,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear, said _Zephon_ bold,
Will save us trial what the least can doe
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.

The Fiend repli’d not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on,
Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or flie
He held it vain; awe from above had quelld
His heart, not else dismai’d.  Now drew they nigh
The western point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, & closing stood in squadron joind
Awaiting next command.  To whom thir Chief
_Gabriel_ from the Front thus calld aloud.

O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimps discerne
_Ithuriel_ and _Zephon_ through the shade,
And with them comes a third of Regal port,
But faded splendor wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.

He scarce had ended, when those two approachd
And brief related whom they brought, wher found,
How busied, in what form and posture coucht.

To whom with stern regard thus _Gabriel_ spake.
Why hast thou, _Satan_, broke the bounds prescrib’d
To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Imploi’d it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss?

To whom thus _Satan_ with contemptuous brow.
_Gabriel_, thou hadst in Heav’n th’ esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question askt
Puts me in doubt.  Lives ther who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomd?  Thou wouldst thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change
Torment with ease, & soonest recompence
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who knowst only good,
But evil hast not tri’d: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer barr
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: thus much what was askt.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harme.

Thus hee in scorn.  The warlike Angel mov’d,
Disdainfully half smiling thus repli’d.
O loss of one in Heav’n to judge of wise,
Since _Satan_ fell, whom follie overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison scap’t,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicenc’t from his bounds in Hell prescrib’d;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to scape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth,
Which thou incurr’st by flying, meet thy flight
Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provok’t.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they
Less hardie to endure? courageous Chief,
The first in flight from pain, had’st thou alleg’d
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive.

To which the Fiend thus answerd frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou knowst I stood
Thy fiercest, when in Battel to thy aide
The blasting volied Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behooves
From hard assaies and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through wayes of danger by himself untri’d.
I therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate Abyss, and spie
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Aire;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve thir Lord
High up in Heav’n, with songs to hymne his Throne,
And practis’d distances to cringe, not fight.

To whom the warriour Angel soon repli’d.
To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to flie pain, professing next the Spie,
Argues no Leader, but a lyar trac’t,
_Satan_, and couldst thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profan’d!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Armie of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith ingag’d,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegeance to th’ acknowledg’d Power supream?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem
Patron of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawn’d, and cring’d, and servilly ador’d
Heav’ns awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reigne?
But mark what I arreede thee now, avant;
Flie thither whence thou fledst: if from this houre
Within these hallowd limits thou appeer,
Back to th’ infernal pit I drag thee chaind,
And Seale thee so, as henceforth not to scorne
The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd.

So threatn’d hee, but _Satan_ to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage repli’d.

Then when I am thy captive talk of chaines,
Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then
Farr heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arme, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Us’d to the yoak, draw’st his triumphant wheels
In progress through the rode of Heav’n Star-pav’d.

While thus he spake, th’ Angelic Squadron bright
Turnd fierie red, sharpning in mooned hornes
Thir Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of _Ceres_ ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands
Least on the threshing floore his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff.  On th’ other side _Satan_ allarm’d
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like _Teneriff_ or _Atlas_ unremov’d:
His stature reacht the Skie, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plum’d; nor wanted in his graspe
What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensu’d, nor onely Paradise
In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope
Of Heav’n perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gon to rack, disturbd and torne
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
Th’ Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heav’n his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt _Astrea_ and the _Scorpion_ signe,
Wherein all things created first he weighd,
The pendulous round Earth with ballanc’t Aire
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battels and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight;
The latter quick up flew, and kickt the beam;
Which _Gabriel_ spying, thus bespake the Fiend.

_Satan_, I know thy strength, and thou knowst mine,
Neither our own but giv’n; what follie then
To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more
Then Heav’n permits, nor mine, though doubld now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weigh’d, & shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.  The Fiend lookt up and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.

       THE END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK V.

Now Morn her rosie steps in th’ Eastern Clime
Advancing, sow’d the Earth with Orient Pearle,
When _Adam_ wak’t, so customd, for his sleep
Was Aerie light, from pure digestion bred,
And temperat vapors bland, which th’ only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, _Aurora’s_ fan,
Lightly dispers’d, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwak’nd _Eve_
With Tresses discompos’d, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-rais’d, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamour’d, and beheld
Beautie, which whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Milde, as when _Zephyrus_ on _Flora_ breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus.  Awake
My fairest, my espous’d, my latest found,
Heav’ns last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrhe, & what the balmie Reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet.

Such whispering wak’d her, but with startl’d eye
On _Adam_, whom imbracing, thus she spake.

O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn return’d, for I this Night,
Such night till this I never pass’d, have dream’d,
If dream’d, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day pass’t, or morrows next designe,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksom night; methought
Close at mine ear one call’d me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,
Why sleepst thou _Eve_? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor’d song; now reignes
Full Orb’d the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heav’n wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I pass’d through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem’d,
Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:
And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood
One shap’d & wing’d like one of those from Heav’n
By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill’d
Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gaz’d;
And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg’d,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis’d?
Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offerd good, why else set here?
This said he paus’d not, but with ventrous Arme
He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil’d
At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoy’d, O Fruit Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt,
Forbidd’n here, it seems, as onely fit
For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant growes,
The Author not impair’d, but honourd more?
Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic _Eve_,
Partake thou also; happie though thou art,
Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,
But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes
Ascend to Heav’n, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smell
So quick’nd appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste.  Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondring at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak’d
To find this but a dream!  Thus _Eve_ her Night
Related, and thus _Adam_ answerd sad.

Best Image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure.  But know that in the Soule
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fansie next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes
To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Som such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unapprov’d, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheart’nd then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more chearful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh imployments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now thir choicest bosom’d smells
Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store.

So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard,
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wip’d them with her haire;
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in thir chrystal sluce, hee ere they fell
Kiss’d as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feard to have offended.

So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shadie arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hov’ring o’re the Ocean brim,
Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray,
Discovering in wide Lantskip all the East
Of Paradise and _Edens_ happie Plains,
Lowly they bow’d adoring, and began
Thir Orisons, each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Thir Maker, in fit strains pronounc’t or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowd from thir lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.

These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almightie, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who sitst above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for yee behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav’n,
On Earth joyn all yee Creatures to extoll
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of Starrs, last in the train of Night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Spheare
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule,
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb’st,
And when high Noon hast gaind, & when thou fallst.
Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli’st
With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies,
And yee five other wandring Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness call’d up Light.
Aire, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceasless change
Varie to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author rise,
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie,
Or wet the thirstie Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breath soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;
Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk
The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven,
To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us onely good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or conceald,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.

So pray’d they innocent, and to thir thoughts
Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm.
On to thir mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farr
Thir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to check
Fruitless imbraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spous’d about him twines
Her mariageable arms, and with her brings
Her dowr th’ adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves.  Them thus imploid beheld
With pittie Heav’ns high King, and to him call’d
_Raphael_, the sociable Spirit, that deign’d
To travel with _Tobias_, and secur’d
His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid.

_Raphael_, said hee, thou hear’st what stir on Earth
_Satan_ from Hell scap’t through the darksom Gulf
Hath raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd
This night the human pair, how he designes
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with _Adam_, in what Bowre or shade
Thou find’st him from the heat of Noon retir’d,
To respit his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happie state,
Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware
He swerve not too secure: tell him withall
His danger, and from whom, what enemie
Late falln himself from Heav’n, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.

So spake th’ Eternal Father, and fulfilld
All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint
After his charge receivd, but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood
Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heav’n; th’ angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all th’ Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heav’n arriv’d, the gate self-opend wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the sov’ran Architect had fram’d.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Starr interpos’d, however small he sees,
Not unconform to other shining Globes,
Earth and the Gard’n of God, with Cedars crownd
Above all Hills.  As when by night the Glass
Of _Galileo_, less assur’d, observes
Imagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the _Cyclades_
_Delos_ or _Samos_ first appeering kenns
A cloudy spot.  Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Skie
Sailes between worlds & worlds, with steddie wing
Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air; till within soare
Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he seems
A _Phoenix_, gaz’d by all, as that sole Bird
When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s
Bright Temple, to _Aegyptian Theb’s_ he flies.
At once on th’ Eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o’re his brest
With regal Ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and round
Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold
And colours dipt in Heav’n; the third his feet
Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile
Skie-tinctur’d grain.  Like _Maia’s_ son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heav’nly fragrance filld
The circuit wide.  Strait knew him all the bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high in honour rise;
For on som message high they guessd him bound.
Thir glittering Tents he passd, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrhe,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balme;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantond as in her prime, and plaid at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wilde above rule or art; enormous bliss.
Him through the spicie Forrest onward com
_Adam_ discernd, as in the dore he sat
Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his fervid Raies, to warme
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then _Adam_ need;
And _Eve_ within, due at her hour prepar’d
For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream,
Berrie or Grape: to whom thus _Adam_ call’d.

Haste hither _Eve_, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Ris’n on mid-noon; som great behest from Heav’n
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe
This day to be our Guest.  But goe with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and poure
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heav’nly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers thir own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies
Her fertil growth, and by disburd’ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.

To whom thus _Eve_. _Adam_, earths hallowd mould,
Of God inspir’d, small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant & juciest Gourd will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as hee
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God hath dispenst his bounties as in Heav’n.

So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to chuse for delicacie best,
What order, so contriv’d as not to mix
Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change,
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yeilds
In _India_ East or West, or middle shoare
In _Pontus_ or the _Punic_ Coast, or where
_Alcinous_ reign’d, fruit of all kindes, in coate,
Rough, or smooth rin’d, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes
From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels prest
She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum’d.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompani’d then with his own compleat
Perfections, in himself was all his state,
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold
Dazles the croud, and sets them all agape.
Neerer his presence _Adam_ though not awd,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,

Thus said.  Native of Heav’n, for other place
None can then Heav’n such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happie places thou hast deignd a while
To want, and honour these, voutsafe with us
Two onely, who yet by sov’ran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bowre
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more coole decline.

Whom thus the Angelic Vertue answerd milde.
_Adam_, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place hast here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav’n
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre
Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise
I have at will.  So to the Silvan Lodge
They came, that like _Pomona’s_ Arbour smil’d
With flourets deck’t and fragrant smells; but _Eve_
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feign’d
Of three that in Mount _Ida_ naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heav’n; no vaile
Shee needed, Vertue-proof, no thought infirme
Alterd her cheek.  On whom the Angel _Haile_
Bestowd, the holy salutation us’d
Long after to blest _Marie_, second _Eve_.

Haile Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heap’d this Table.  Rais’d of grassie terf
Thir Table was, and mossie seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All _Autumn_ pil’d, though _Spring_ and _Autumn_ here
Danc’d hand in hand.  A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner coole; when thus began
Our Authour.  Heav’nly stranger, please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfet good unmeasur’d out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath caus’d
The Earth to yeild; unsavourie food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all.

To whom the Angel.  Therefore what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ingrateful food: and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower facultie
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustaind and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg’d
Vapours not yet into her substance turnd.
Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbes.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompence
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav’n the Trees
Of life ambrosial frutage bear, and vines
Yeild Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground
Cover’d with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice.  So down they sat,
And to thir viands fell, nor seemingly
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heate
To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn
Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold
As from the Mine.  Mean while at Table _Eve_
Ministerd naked, and thir flowing cups
With pleasant liquors crown’d: O innocence
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin
Enamour’d at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reign’d, nor jealousie
Was understood, the injur’d Lovers Hell.

Thus when with meats & drinks they had suffic’d,
Not burd’nd Nature, sudden mind arose
In _Adam_, not to let th’ occasion pass
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of thir being
Who dwell in Heav’n, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so farr, whose radiant forms
Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far
Exceeded human, and his wary speech
Thus to th’ Empyreal Minister he fram’d.

Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
Under whose lowly roof thou hast voutsaf’t
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem
At Heav’ns high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?

 To whom the winged Hierarch repli’d.
O _Adam_, one Almightie is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not deprav’d from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Indu’d with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refin’d, more spiritous, and pure,
As neerer to him plac’t or neerer tending
Each in thir several active Sphears assignd,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportiond to each kind.  So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, last the bright consummate floure
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit
Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublim’d
To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and sense,
Fansie and understanding, whence the soule
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you,
To proper substance; time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit
Improv’d by tract of time, and wingd ascend
Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice
Here or in Heav’nly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whose progenie you are.  Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happie state
Can comprehend, incapable of more.

To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli’d.
O favourable spirit, propitious guest,
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God.  But say,
What meant that caution joind, _If ye be found
obedient?_ can wee want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert
Who formd us from the dust, and plac’d us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?

To whom the Angel.  Son of Heav’n and Earth,
Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God;
That thou continu’st such, owe to thy self,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution giv’n thee; be advis’d.
God made thee perfet, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will
By nature free, not over-rul’d by Fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity;
Our voluntarie service he requires,
Not our necessitated, such with him
Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tri’d whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By Destinie, and can no other choose?
My self and all th’ Angelic Host that stand
In sight of God enthron’d, our happie state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety none; freely we serve.
Because wee freely love, as in our will
To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And som are fall’n, to disobedience fall’n,
And so from Heav’n to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss into what woe!

To whom our great Progenitor.  Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted eare
Divine instructer, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills
Aereal Music send: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whose command
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assur’d me and still assure: though what thou tellst
Hath past in Heav’n, som doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
Hath finisht half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great Zone of Heav’n.

Thus _Adam_ made request, and _Raphael_
After short pause assenting, thus began.

High matter thou injoinst me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense th’ invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorse
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfet while they stood; how last unfould
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispenc’t, and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By lik’ning spiritual to corporal forms,
As may express them best, though what if Earth
Be but the shaddow of Heav’n, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?

As yet this world was not, and _Chaos_ wilde
Reignd where these Heav’ns now rowl, where Earth now rests
Upon her Center pois’d, when on a day
(For Time, though in Eternitie, appli’d
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future) on such day
As Heav’ns great Year brings forth, th’ Empyreal Host
Of Angels by Imperial summons call’d,
Innumerable before th’ Almighties Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heav’n appeerd
Under thir Hierarchs in orders bright
Ten thousand thousand Ensignes high advanc’d,
Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare
Streame in the Aire, and for distinction serve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in thir glittering Tissues bear imblaz’d
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love
Recorded eminent.  Thus when in Orbes
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,
By whom in bliss imbosom’d sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whoseop
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.

Hear all ye Angels, Progenie of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok’t shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My onely Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand; your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow
All knees in Heav’n, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great Vice-gerent Reign abide
United as one individual Soule
For ever happie: him who disobeyes
Mee disobeyes, breaks union, and that day
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep ingulft, his place
Ordaind without redemption, without end.

So spake th’ Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemd well pleas’d, all seem’d, but were not all.
That day, as other solem dayes, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred Hill,
Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Spheare
Of Planets and of fixt in all her Wheeles
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv’d, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem:
And in thir motions harmonie Divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Eevning approachd
(For we have also our Eevning and our Morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous, all in Circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden pil’d
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows:
In Pearl, in Diamond, and massie Gold,
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav’n.
They eat, they drink, and with refection sweet
Are fill’d, before th’ all bounteous King, who showrd
With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy.
Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhal’d
From that high mount of God, whence light & shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heav’n had changd
To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veile) and roseat Dews dispos’d
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr
Then all this globous Earth in Plain outspred,
(Such are the Courts of God) Th’ Angelic throng
Disperst in Bands and Files thir Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard,
Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept
Fannd with coole Winds, save those who in thir course
Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne
Alternate all night long: but not so wak’d
_Satan_, so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more Heav’n; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power,
In favour and praeeminence, yet fraught
With envie against the Son of God, that day
Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd
_Messiah_ King anointed, could not beare
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird.
Deep malice thence conceiving & disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv’d
With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobey’d the Throne supream
Contemptuous, and his next subordinate
Awak’ning, thus to him in secret spake.

Sleepst thou Companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids? and remembrest what Decree
Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips
Of Heav’ns Almightie.  Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou seest impos’d;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate
What doubtful may ensue, more in this place
To utter is not safe.  Assemble thou
Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me thir Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we possess
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great _Messiah_, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.

So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus’d
Bad influence into th’ unwarie brest
Of his Associate; hee together calls,
Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the most High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heav’n,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integritie; but all obey’d
The wonted signal, and superior voice
Of thir great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heav’n;
His count’nance, as the Morning Starr that guides
The starrie flock, allur’d them, and with lyes
Drew after him the third part of Heav’ns Host:
Mean while th’ Eternal eye, whose sight discernes
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burne
Nightly before him, saw without thir light
Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spred
Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his onely Son thus said.

Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Neerly it now concernes us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deitie or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to trie
In battel, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all imploy
In our defence, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill.

To whom the Son with calm aspect and cleer
Light’ning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mightie Father, thou thy foes
Justly hast in derision, and secure
Laugh’st at thir vain designes and tumults vain,
Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate
Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
Giv’n me to quell thir pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heav’n.

So spake the Son, but _Satan_ with his Powers
Farr was advanc’t on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Starrs of Night,
Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flouer.
Regions they pass’d, the mightie Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In thir triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, _Adam_, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose
Stretcht into Longitude; which having pass’d
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and _Satan_ to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Rais’d on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs
From Diamond Quarries hew’n, & Rocks of Gold,
The Palace of great _Lucifer_, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, hee
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon
_Messiah_ was declar’d in sight of Heav’n,
The Mountain of the Congregation call’d;
For thither he assembl’d all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of thir King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears.

Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Vertues, Powers,
If these magnific Titles yet remain
Not meerly titular, since by Decree
Another now hath to himself ingross’t
All Power, and us eclipst under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This onely to consult how we may best
With what may be devis’d of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endur’d,
To one and to his image now proclaim’d?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and chuse to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heav’n possest before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jarr not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchie over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendor less,
In freedome equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Erre not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to th’ abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordain’d to govern, not to serve?

Thus farr his bold discourse without controule
Had audience, when among the Seraphim
_Abdiel_, then whom none with more zeale ador’d
The Deitie, and divine commands obei’d,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeale severe
The current of his fury thus oppos’d.

O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav’n
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peeres.
Canst thou with impious obloquie condemne
The just Decree of God, pronounc’t and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endu’d
With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav’n
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou saist
Flatly unjust, to binde with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reigne,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
With him the points of libertie, who made
Thee what thou art, & formd the Pow’rs of Heav’n
Such as he pleasd, and circumscrib’d thir being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignitie
How provident he is, how farr from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happie state under one Head more neer
United.  But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reigne:
Thy self though great & glorious dost thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joind in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, ev’n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav’n
By him created in thir bright degrees,
Crownd them with Glory, & to thir Glory nam’d
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscur’d,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head
One of our number thus reduc’t becomes,
His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
Returns our own.  Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these; but hast’n to appease
Th’ incensed Father, and th’ incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.

So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeale
None seconded, as out of season judg’d,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoic’d
Th’ Apostat, and more haughty thus repli’d.
That we were formd then saist thou? & the work
Of secondarie hands, by task transferd
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? rememberst thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais’d
By our own quick’ning power, when fatal course
Had circl’d his full Orbe, the birth mature
Of this our native Heav’n, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt th’ Almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging.  This report,
These tidings carrie to th’ anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.

He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarce murmur echo’d to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompass’d round with foes, thus answerd bold.

O alienate from God, O spirit accurst,
Forsak’n of all good; I see thy fall
Determind, and thy hapless crew involv’d
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spred
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubl’d how to quit the yoke
Of Gods _Messiah_; those indulgent Laws
Will not be now voutsaf’t, other Decrees
Against thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Scepter which thou didst reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and breake
Thy disobedience.  Well thou didst advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrauth
Impendent, raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learne,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.

So spake the Seraph _Abdiel_ faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only hee;
Among innumerable false, unmov’d,
Unshak’n, unseduc’d, unterrifi’d
His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single.  From amidst them forth he passd,
Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind
Superior, nor of violence fear’d aught;
And with retorted scorn his back he turn’d
On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doom’d.

       THE END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK VI.

All night the dreadless Angel unpursu’d
Through Heav’ns wide Champain held his way, till Morn,
Wak’t by the circling Hours, with rosie hand
Unbarr’d the gates of Light.  There is a Cave
Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne,
Where light and darkness in perpetual round
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heav’n
Grateful vicissitude, like Day and Night;
Light issues forth, and at the other dore
Obsequious darkness enters, till her houre
To veile the Heav’n, though darkness there might well
Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn
Such as in highest Heav’n, arrayd in Gold
Empyreal, from before her vanisht Night,
Shot through with orient Beams: when all the Plain
Coverd with thick embatteld Squadrons bright,
Chariots and flaming Armes, and fierie Steeds
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:
Warr he perceav’d, warr in procinct, and found
Already known what he for news had thought
To have reported: gladly then he mixt
Among those friendly Powers who him receav’d
With joy and acclamations loud, that one
That of so many Myriads fall’n, yet one
Returnd not lost: On to the sacred hill
They led him high applauded, and present
Before the seat supream; from whence a voice
From midst a Golden Cloud thus milde was heard.

Servant of God, well done, well hast thou fought
The better fight, who single hast maintaind
Against revolted multitudes the Cause
Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Armes;
And for the testimonie of Truth hast born
Universal reproach, far worse to beare
Then violence: for this was all thy care
To stand approv’d in sight of God, though Worlds
Judg’d thee perverse: the easier conquest now
Remains thee, aided by this host of friends,
Back on thy foes more glorious to return
Then scornd thou didst depart, and to subdue
By force, who reason for thir Law refuse,
Right reason for thir Law, and for thir King
_Messiah_, who by right of merit Reigns.
Goe _Michael_ of Celestial Armies Prince,
And thou in Military prowess next
_Gabriel_, lead forth to Battel these my Sons
Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints
By Thousands and by Millions rang’d for fight;
Equal in number to that Godless crew
Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms
Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heav’n
Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss,
Into thir place of punishment, the Gulf
Of _Tartarus_, which ready opens wide
His fiery _Chaos_ to receave thir fall.

So spake the Sovran voice, and Clouds began
To darken all the Hill, and smoak to rowl
In duskie wreathes, reluctant flames, the signe
Of wrauth awak’t: nor with less dread the loud
Ethereal Trumpet from on high gan blow:
At which command the Powers Militant,
That stood for Heav’n, in mighty Quadrate joyn’d
Of Union irresistible, mov’d on
In silence thir bright Legions, to the sound
Of instrumental Harmonie that breath’d
Heroic Ardor to advent’rous deeds
Under thir God-like Leaders, in the Cause
Of God and his _Messiah_.  On they move
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious Hill,
Nor streit’ning Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides
Thir perfet ranks; for high above the ground
Thir march was, and the passive Air upbore
Thir nimble tread; as when the total kind
Of Birds in orderly array on wing
Came summond over _Eden_ to receive
Thir names of thee; so over many a tract
Of Heav’n they march’d, and many a Province wide
Tenfold the length of this terrene: at last
Farr in th’ Horizon to the North appeer’d
From skirt to skirt a fierie Region, stretcht
In battailous aspect, and neerer view
Bristl’d with upright beams innumerable
Of rigid Spears, and Helmets throng’d, and Shields
Various, with boastful Argument portraid,
The banded Powers of _Satan_ hasting on
With furious expedition; for they weend
That self same day by fight, or by surprize
To win the Mount of God, and on his Throne
To set the envier of his State, the proud
Aspirer, but thir thoughts prov’d fond and vain
In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd
At first, that Angel should with Angel warr,
And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet
So oft in Festivals of joy and love
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire
Hymning th’ Eternal Father: but the shout
Of Battel now began, and rushing sound
Of onset ended soon each milder thought.
High in the midst exalted as a God
Th’ Apostat in his Sun-bright Chariot sate
Idol of Majestie Divine, enclos’d
With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields;
Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now
’Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left,
A dreadful interval, and Front to Front
Presented stood in terrible array
Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van,
On the rough edge of battel ere it joyn’d,
_Satan_ with vast and haughtie strides advanc’t,
Came towring, armd in Adamant and Gold;
_Abdiel_ that sight endur’d not, where he stood
Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
And thus his own undaunted heart explores.

O Heav’n! that such resemblance of the Highest
Should yet remain, where faith and realtie
Remain not; wherfore should not strength & might
There fail where Vertue fails, or weakest prove
Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable?
His puissance, trusting in th’ Almightie’s aide,
I mean to try, whose Reason I have tri’d
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just,
That he who in debate of Truth hath won,
Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike
Victor; though brutish that contest and foule,
When Reason hath to deal with force, yet so
Most reason is that Reason overcome.

So pondering, and from his armed Peers
Forth stepping opposite, half way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention more
Incens’t, and thus securely him defi’d.

Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reacht
The highth of thy aspiring unoppos’d,
The Throne of God unguarded, and his side
Abandond at the terror of thy Power
Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain
Against th’ Omnipotent to rise in Arms;
Who out of smallest things could without end
Have rais’d incessant Armies to defeat
Thy folly; or with solitarie hand
Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow
Unaided could have finisht thee, and whelmd
Thy Legions under darkness; but thou seest
All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith
Prefer, and Pietie to God, though then
To thee not visible, when I alone
Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent
From all: my Sect thou seest, now learn too late
How few somtimes may know, when thousands err.

  Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance
Thus answerd.  Ill for thee, but in wisht houre
Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst
From flight, seditious Angel, to receave
Thy merited reward, the first assay
Of this right hand provok’t, since first that tongue
Inspir’d with contradiction durst oppose
A third part of the Gods, in Synod met
Thir Deities to assert, who while they feel
Vigour Divine within them, can allow
Omnipotence to none.  But well thou comst
Before thy fellows, ambitious to win
From me som Plume, that thy success may show
Destruction to the rest: this pause between
(Unanswerd least thou boast) to let thee know;
At first I thought that Libertie and Heav’n
To heav’nly Soules had bin all one; but now
I see that most through sloth had rather serve,
Ministring Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song;
Such hast thou arm’d, the Minstrelsie of Heav’n,
Servilitie with freedom to contend,
As both thir deeds compar’d this day shall prove.

To whom in brief thus _Abdiel_ stern repli’d.
Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find
Of erring, from the path of truth remote:
Unjustly thou deprav’st it with the name
Of _Servitude_ to serve whom God ordains,
Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same,
When he who rules is worthiest, and excells
Them whom he governs.  This is servitude,
To serve th’ unwise, or him who hath rebelld
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,
Thy self not free, but to thy self enthrall’d;
Yet leudly dar’st our ministring upbraid.
Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let mee serve
In Heav’n God ever blessed, and his Divine
Behests obey, worthiest to be obey’d,
Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while
From mee returnd, as erst thou saidst, from flight,
This greeting on thy impious Crest receive.

So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On the proud Crest of _Satan_, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield
Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge
He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee
His massie Spear upstaid; as if on Earth
Winds under ground or waters forcing way
Sidelong, had push’t a Mountain from his seat
Half sunk with all his Pines.  Amazement seis’d
The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see
Thus foil’d thir mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout,
Presage of Victorie and fierce desire
Of Battel: whereat _Michael_ bid sound
Th’ Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heav’n
It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung
_Hosanna_ to the Highest: nor stood at gaze
The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joyn’d
The horrid shock: now storming furie rose,
And clamour such as heard in Heav’n till now
Was never, Arms on Armour clashing bray’d
Horrible discord, and the madding Wheeles
Of brazen Chariots rag’d; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss
Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew,
And flying vaulted either Host with fire.
Sounder fierie Cope together rush’d
Both Battels maine, with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage; all Heav’n
Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth
Had to her Center shook.  What wonder? when
Millions of fierce encountring Angels fought
On either side, the least of whom could weild
These Elements, and arm him with the force
Of all thir Regions: how much more of Power
Armie against Armie numberless to raise
Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb,
Though not destroy, thir happie Native seat;
Had not th’ Eternal King Omnipotent
From his strong hold of Heav’n high over-rul’d
And limited thir might; though numberd such
As each divided Legion might have seemd
A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand
A Legion; led in fight, yet Leader seemd
Each Warriour single as in Chief, expert
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway
Of Battel, open when, and when to close
The ridges of grim Warr; no thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argu’d fear; each on himself reli’d,
As onely in his arm the moment lay
Of victorie; deeds of eternal fame
Were don, but infinite: for wide was spred
That Warr and various; somtimes on firm ground
A standing fight, then soaring on main wing
Tormented all the Air; all Air seemd then
Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale
The Battel hung; till _Satan_, who that day
Prodigious power had shewn, and met in Armes
No equal, raunging through the dire attack
Of fighting Seraphim confus’d, at length
Saw where the Sword of _Michael_ smote, and fell’d
Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway
Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down
Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand
He hasted, and oppos’d the rockie Orb
Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield
A vast circumference: At his approach
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toile
Surceas’d, and glad as hoping here to end
Intestine War in Heav’n, the arch foe subdu’d
Or Captive drag’d in Chains, with hostile frown
And visage all enflam’d first thus began.

Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnam’d in Heav’n, now plenteous, as thou seest
These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thy self
And thy adherents: how hast thou disturb’d
Heav’ns blessed peace, and into Nature brought
Miserie, uncreated till the crime
Of thy Rebellion? how hast thou instill’d
Thy malice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now prov’d false.  But think not here
To trouble Holy Rest; Heav’n casts thee out
From all her Confines.  Heav’n the seat of bliss
Brooks not the works of violence and Warr.
Hence then, and evil go with thee along
Thy ofspring, to the place of evil, Hell,
Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broiles,
Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doome,
Or som more sudden vengeance wing’d from God
Precipitate thee with augmented paine.

So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversarie.  Nor think thou with wind
Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds
Thou canst not.  Hast thou turnd the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unvanquisht, easier to transact with mee
That thou shouldst hope, imperious, & with threats
To chase me hence? erre not that so shall end
The strife which thou call’st evil, but wee style
The strife of Glorie: which we mean to win,
Or turn this Heav’n it self into the Hell
Thou fablest, here however to dwell free,
If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force,
And join him nam’d _Almightie_ to thy aid,
I flie not, but have sought thee farr and nigh.

They ended parle, and both addrest for fight
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such highth
Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd,
Stood they or mov’d, in stature, motion, arms
Fit to decide the Empire of great Heav’n.
Now wav’d thir fierie Swords, and in the Aire
Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns thir Shields
Blaz’d opposite, while expectation stood
In horror; from each hand with speed retir’d
Where erst was thickest fight, th’ Angelic throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion, such as to set forth
Great things by small, If Natures concord broke,
Among the Constellations warr were sprung,
Two Planets rushing from aspect maligne
Of fiercest opposition in mid Skie,
Should combat, and thir jarring Sphears confound.
Together both with next to Almightie Arme,
Uplifted imminent one stroke they aim’d
That might determine, and not need repeate,
As not of power, at once; nor odds appeerd
In might or swift prevention; but the sword
Of _Michael_ from the Armorie of God
Was giv’n him temperd so, that neither keen
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
The sword of _Satan_ with steep force to smite
Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid,
But with swift wheele reverse, deep entring shar’d
All his right side; then _Satan_ first knew pain,
And writh’d him to and fro convolv’d; so sore
The griding sword with discontinuous wound
Pass’d through him, but th’ Ethereal substance clos’d
Not long divisible, and from the gash
A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flow’d
Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his Armour staind ere while so bright.
Forthwith on all sides to his aide was run
By Angels many and strong, who interpos’d
Defence, while others bore him on thir Shields
Back to his Chariot; where it stood retir’d
From off the files of warr; there they him laid
Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame
To find himself not matchless, and his pride
Humbl’d by such rebuke, so farr beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.
Yet soon he heal’d; for Spirits that live throughout
Vital in every part, not as frail man
In Entrailes, Heart or Head, Liver or Reines,
Cannot but by annihilating die;
Nor in thir liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more then can the fluid Aire:
All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Eare,
All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please,
They Limb themselves, and colour, shape or size
Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare.

Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd
Memorial, where the might of _Gabriel_ fought,
And with fierce Ensignes pierc’d the deep array
Of _Moloc_ furious King, who him defi’d,
And at his Chariot wheeles to drag him bound
Threatn’d, nor from the Holie One of Heav’n
Refrein’d his tongue blasphemous; but anon
Down clov’n to the waste, with shatterd Armes
And uncouth paine fled bellowing.  On each wing
_Uriel_ and _Raphael_ his vaunting foe,
Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd,
Vanquish’d _Adramelec_, and _Asmadai_,
Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods
Disdain’d, but meaner thoughts learnd in thir flight,
Mangl’d with gastly wounds through Plate and Maile.
Nor stood unmindful _Abdiel_ to annoy
The Atheist crew, but with redoubl’d blow
_Ariel_ and _Arioc_, and the violence
Of _Ramiel_ scorcht and blasted overthrew.
I might relate of thousands, and thir names
Eternize here on Earth; but those elect
Angels contented with thir fame in Heav’n
Seek not the praise of men: the other sort
In might though wondrous and in Acts of Warr,
Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doome
Canceld from Heav’n and sacred memorie,
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell.
For strength from Truth divided and from Just,
Illaudable, naught merits but dispraise
And ignominie, yet to glorie aspires
Vain glorious, and through infamie seeks fame:
Therfore Eternal silence be thir doome.

And now thir mightiest quelld, the battel swerv’d,
With many an inrode gor’d; deformed rout
Enter’d, and foul disorder; all the ground
With shiverd armour strow’n, and on a heap
Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd
And fierie foaming Steeds; what stood, recoyld
Orewearied, through the faint Satanic Host
Defensive scarse, or with pale fear surpris’d,
Then first with fear surpris’d and sense of paine
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought
By sinne of disobedience, till that hour
Not liable to fear or flight or paine.
Far otherwise th’ inviolable Saints
In Cubic Phalanx firm advanc’t entire,
Invulnerable, impenitrably arm’d:
Such high advantages thir innocence
Gave them above thir foes, not to have sinnd,
Not to have disobei’d; in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pain’d
By wound, though from thir place by violence mov’d.

Now Night her course began, and over Heav’n
Inducing darkness, grateful truce impos’d,
And silence on the odious dinn of Warr:
Under her Cloudie covert both retir’d,
Victor and Vanquisht: on the foughten field
_Michael_ and his Angels prevalent
Encamping, plac’d in Guard thir Watches round,
Cherubic waving fires: on th’ other part
_Satan_ with his rebellious disappeerd,
Far in the dark dislodg’d, and void of rest,
His Potentates to Councel call’d by night;
And in the midst thus undismai’d began.

O now in danger tri’d, now known in Armes
Not to be overpowerd, Companions deare,
Found worthy not of Libertie alone,
Too mean pretense, but what we more affect,
Honour, Dominion, Glorie, and renowne,
Who have sustaind one day in doubtful fight,
(And if one day, why not Eternal dayes?)
What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send
Against us from about his Throne, and judg’d
Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
But proves not so: then fallible, it seems,
Of future we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought.  True is, less firmly arm’d,
Some disadvantage we endur’d and paine,
Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd,
Since now we find this our Empyreal forme
Incapable of mortal injurie
Imperishable, and though peirc’d with wound,
Soon closing, and by native vigour heal’d.
Of evil then so small as easie think
The remedie; perhaps more valid Armes,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
May serve to better us, and worse our foes,
Or equal what between us made the odds,
In Nature none: if other hidden cause
Left them Superiour, while we can preserve
Unhurt our mindes, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation will disclose.

He sat; and in th’ assembly next upstood
_Nisroc_, of Principalities the prime;
As one he stood escap’t from cruel fight,
Sore toild, his riv’n Armes to havoc hewn,
And cloudie in aspect thus answering spake.
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal work we find
Against unequal armes to fight in paine,
Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands
Of Mightiest.  Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfet miserie, the worst
Of evils, and excessive, overturnes
All patience.  He who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend
Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arme
Our selves with like defence, to mee deserves
No less then for deliverance what we owe.

Whereto with look compos’d _Satan_ repli’d.
Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Beleivst so main to our success, I bring;
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heav’n, adornd
With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gemms & Gold,
Whose Eye so superficially surveyes
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fierie spume, till toucht
With Heav’ns ray, and temperd they shoot forth
So beauteous, op’ning to the ambient light.
These in thir dark Nativitie the Deep
Shall yeild us, pregnant with infernal flame,
Which into hallow Engins long and round
Thick-rammd, at th’ other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate shall send forth
From far with thundring noise among our foes
Such implements of mischief as shall dash
To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labour, yet ere dawne,
Effect shall end our wish.  Mean while revive;
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird.
He ended, and his words thir drooping chere
Enlightn’d, and thir languisht hope reviv’d.
Th’ invention all admir’d, and each, how hee
To be th’ inventer miss’d, so easie it seemd
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible: yet haply of thy Race
In future dayes, if Malice should abound,
Some one intent on mischief, or inspir’d
With dev’lish machination might devise
Like instrument to plague the Sons of men
For sin, on warr and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from Councel to the work they flew,
None arguing stood, innumerable hands
Were ready, in a moment up they turnd
Wide the Celestial soile, and saw beneath
Th’ originals of Nature in thir crude
Conception; Sulphurous and Nitrous Foame
They found, they mingl’d, and with suttle Art,
Concocted and adusted they reduc’d
To blackest grain, and into store conveyd:
Part hidd’n veins diggd up (nor hath this Earth
Entrails unlike) of Mineral and Stone,
Whereof to found thir Engins and thir Balls
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.
So all ere day spring, under conscious Night
Secret they finish’d, and in order set,
With silent circumspection unespi’d.
Now when fair Morn Orient in Heav’n appeerd
Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms
The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood
Of Golden Panoplie, refulgent Host,
Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills
Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scoure,
Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe,
Where lodg’d, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in alt: him soon they met
Under spred Ensignes moving nigh, in slow
But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail
_Zephiel_, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid Aire aloud thus cri’d.

Arme, Warriours, Arme for fight, the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud
He comes, and settl’d in his face I see
Sad resolution and secure: let each
His Adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his Helme, gripe fast his orbed Shield,
Born eevn or high, for this day will pour down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizling showr,
But ratling storm of Arrows barbd with fire.
So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment;
Instant without disturb they took Allarm,
And onward move Embattelld; when behold
Not distant far with heavie pace the Foe
Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube
Training his devilish Enginrie, impal’d
On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep,
To hide the fraud.  At interview both stood
A while, but suddenly at head appeerd
_Satan_: And thus was heard Commanding loud.

Vangard, to Right and Left the Front unfould;
That all may see who hate us, how we seek
Peace and composure, and with open brest
Stand readie to receive them, if they like
Our overture, and turn not back perverse;
But that I doubt, however witness Heaven,
Heav’n witness thou anon, while we discharge
Freely our part: yee who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear.

So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce
Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front
Divided, and to either Flank retir’d.
Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange,
A triple-mounted row of Pillars laid
On Wheels (for like to Pillars most they seem’d
Or hollow’d bodies made of Oak or Firr
With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain fell’d)
Brass, Iron, Stonie mould, had not thir mouthes
With hideous orifice gap’t on us wide,
Portending hollow truce; at each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed
Stood waving tipt with fire; while we suspense,
Collected stood within our thoughts amus’d,
Not long, for sudden all at once thir Reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent appli’d
With nicest touch.  Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscur’d with smoak, all Heav’n appeerd,
From those deep-throated Engins belcht, whose roar
Emboweld with outragious noise the Air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foule
Thir devillish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail
Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host
Level’d, with such impetuous furie smote,
That whom they hit, none on thir feet might stand,
Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rowl’d;
The sooner for thir Arms, unarm’d they might
Have easily as Spirits evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove; but now
Foule dissipation follow’d and forc’t rout;
Nor serv’d it to relax thir serried files.
What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Doubl’d, would render them yet more despis’d,
And to thir foes a laughter; for in view
Stood rankt of Seraphim another row
In posture to displode thir second tire
Of Thunder: back defeated to return
They worse abhorr’d.  _Satan_ beheld thir plight,
And to his Mates thus in derision call’d.

O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud?
Ere while they fierce were coming, and when wee,
To entertain them fair with open Front
And Brest, (what could we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, strait they chang’d thir minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd
Somwhat extravagant and wilde, perhaps
For joy of offerd peace: but I suppose
If our proposals once again were heard
We should compel them to a quick result.

To whom thus _Belial_ in like gamesom mood.
Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urg’d home,
Such as we might perceive amus’d them all,
And stumbl’d many, who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand;
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They shew us when our foes walk not upright.

So they among themselves in pleasant veine
Stood scoffing, highthn’d in thir thoughts beyond
All doubt of Victorie, eternal might
To match with thir inventions they presum’d
So easie, and of his Thunder made a scorn,
And all his Host derided, while they stood
A while in trouble; but they stood not long,
Rage prompted them at length, & found them arms
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.
Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power
Which God hath in his mighty Angels plac’d)
Thir Arms away they threw, and to the Hills
(For Earth hath this variety from Heav’n
Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale)
Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew,
From thir foundations loosning to and fro
They pluckt the seated Hills with all thir load,
Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops
Up lifting bore them in thir hands: Amaze,
Be sure, and terrour seis’d the rebel Host,
When coming towards them so dread they saw
The bottom of the Mountains upward turn’d,
Till on those cursed Engins triple-row
They saw them whelmd, and all thir confidence
Under the weight of Mountains buried deep,
Themselves invaded next, and on thir heads
Main Promontories flung, which in the Air
Came shadowing, and opprest whole Legions arm’d,
Thir armor help’d thir harm, crush’t in and brus’d
Into thir substance pent, which wrought them pain
Implacable, and many a dolorous groan,
Long strugling underneath, ere they could wind
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light,
Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.
The rest in imitation to like Armes
Betook them, and the neighbouring Hills uptore;
So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills
Hurl’d to and fro with jaculation dire,
That under ground they fought in dismal shade;
Infernal noise; Warr seem’d a civil Game
To this uproar; horrid confusion heapt
Upon confusion rose: and now all Heav’n
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspred,
Had not th’ Almightie Father where he sits
Shrin’d in his Sanctuarie of Heav’n secure,
Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen
This tumult, and permitted all, advis’d:
That his great purpose he might so fulfill,
To honour his Anointed Son aveng’d
Upon his enemies, and to declare
All power on him transferr’d: whence to his Son
Th’ Assessor of his Throne he thus began.

Effulgence of my Glorie, Son belov’d,
Son in whose face invisible is beheld
Visibly, what by Deitie I am,
And in whose hand what by Decree I doe,
Second Omnipotence, two dayes are past,
Two dayes, as we compute the dayes of Heav’n,
Since _Michael_ and his Powers went forth to tame
These disobedient; sore hath been thir fight,
As likeliest was, when two such Foes met arm’d;
For to themselves I left them, and thou knowst,
Equal in their Creation they were form’d,
Save what sin hath impaird, which yet hath wrought
Insensibly, for I suspend thir doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
Endless, and no solution will be found:
Warr wearied hath perform’d what Warr can do,
And to disorder’d rage let loose the reines,
With Mountains as with Weapons arm’d, which makes
Wild work in Heav’n, and dangerous to the maine.
Two dayes are therefore past, the third is thine;
For thee I have ordain’d it, and thus farr
Have sufferd, that the Glorie may be thine
Of ending this great Warr, since none but Thou
Can end it.  Into thee such Vertue and Grace
Immense I have transfus’d, that all may know
In Heav’n and Hell thy Power above compare,
And this perverse Commotion governd thus,
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
Of all things, to be Heir and to be King
By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right.
Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might,
Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheeles
That shake Heav’ns basis, bring forth all my Warr,
My Bow and Thunder, my Almightie Arms
Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh;
Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out
From all Heav’ns bounds into the utter Deep:
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
God and _Messiah_ his anointed King.

He said, and on his Son with Rayes direct
Shon full, he all his Father full exprest
Ineffably into his face receiv’d,
And thus the filial Godhead answering spake.

O Father, O Supream of heav’nly Thrones,
First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou alwayes seekst
To glorifie thy Son, I alwayes thee,
As is most just; this I my Glorie account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou in me well pleas’d, declarst thy will
Fulfill’d, which to fulfil is all my bliss.
Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume,
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
Thou shalt be All in All, and I in thee
For ever, and in mee all whom thou lov’st:
But whom thou hat’st, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
Armd with thy might, rid heav’n of these rebell’d,
To thir prepar’d ill Mansion driven down
To chains of Darkness, and th’ undying Worm,
That from thy just obedience could revolt,
Whom to obey is happiness entire.
Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from th’ impure
Farr separate, circling thy holy Mount
Unfained _Halleluiahs_ to thee sing,
Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.
So said, he o’re his Scepter bowing, rose
From the right hand of Glorie where he sate,
And the third sacred Morn began to shine
Dawning through Heav’n: forth rush’d with whirlwind sound
The Chariot of Paternal Deitie,
Flashing thick flames, Wheele within Wheele undrawn,
It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyd
By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each
Had wondrous, as with Starrs thir bodies all
And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the Wheels
Of Beril, and careering Fires between;
Over thir heads a chrystal Firmament,
Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colours of the showrie Arch.
Hee in Celestial Panoplie all armd
Of radiant _Urim_, work divinely wrought,
Ascended, at his right hand Victorie
Sate Eagle-wing’d, beside him hung his Bow
And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stor’d,
And from about him fierce Effusion rowld
Of smoak and bickering flame, and sparkles dire;
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
He onward came, farr off his coming shon,
And twentie thousand (I thir number heard)
Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen:
Hee on the wings of Cherub rode sublime
On the Crystallin Skie, in Saphir Thron’d.
Illustrious farr and wide, but by his own
First seen, them unexpected joy surpriz’d,
When the great Ensign of _Messiah_ blaz’d
Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heav’n:
Under whose Conduct _Michael_ soon reduc’d
His Armie, circumfus’d on either Wing,
Under thir Head imbodied all in one.
Before him Power Divine his way prepar’d;
At his command the uprooted Hills retir’d
Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
Obsequious, Heav’n his wonted face renewd,
And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smil’d.
This saw his hapless Foes, but stood obdur’d,
And to rebellious fight rallied thir Powers
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.
In heav’nly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
But to convince the proud what Signs availe,
Or Wonders move th’ obdurate to relent?
They hard’nd more by what might most reclame,
Grieving to see his Glorie, at the sight
Took envie, and aspiring to his highth,
Stood reimbattell’d fierce, by force or fraud
Weening to prosper, and at length prevaile
Against God and _Messiah_, or to fall
In universal ruin last, and now
To final Battel drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his Host on either hand thus spake.

Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand
Ye Angels arm’d, this day from Battel rest;
Faithful hath been your Warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause,
And as ye have receivd, so have ye don
Invincibly; but of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs,
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints;
Number to this dayes work is not ordain’d
Nor multitude, stand onely and behold
Gods indignation on these Godless pourd
By mee; not you but mee they have despis’d,
Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage,
Because the Father, t’ whom in Heav’n supream
Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains,
Hath honourd me according to his will.
Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assig’n’d;
That they may have thir wish, to trie with mee
In Battel which the stronger proves, they all,
Or I alone against them, since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excells;
Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe.

So spake the Son, and into terrour chang’d
His count’nance too severe to be beheld
And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies.
At once the Four spred out thir Starrie wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbes
Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound
Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host.
Hee on his impious Foes right onward drove,
Gloomie as Night; under his burning Wheeles
The stedfast Empyrean shook throughout,
All but the Throne it self of God.  Full soon
Among them he arriv’d; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in thir Soules infix’d
Plagues; they astonisht all resistance lost,
All courage; down thir idle weapons drop’d;
O’re Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wish’d the Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag’d Foure,
Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels,
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes,
One Spirit in them rul’d, and every eye
Glar’d lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among th’ accurst, that witherd all thir strength,
And of thir wonted vigour left them draind,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fall’n.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but check’d
His Thunder in mid Volie, for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heav’n:
The overthrown he rais’d, and as a Heard
Of Goats or timerous flock together throngd
Drove them before him Thunder-struck, pursu’d
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And Chrystall wall of Heav’n, which op’ning wide,
Rowld inward, and a spacious Gap disclos’d
Into the wastful Deep; the monstrous sight
Strook them with horror backward, but far worse
Urg’d them behind; headlong themselvs they threw
Down from the verge of Heav’n, Eternal wrauth
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.

Hell heard th’ unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heav’n ruining from Heav’n and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine dayes they fell; confounded _Chaos_ roard,
And felt tenfold confusion in thir fall
Through his wilde Anarchie, so huge a rout
Incumberd him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning receavd them whole, and on them clos’d,
Hell thir fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and paine.
Disburd’nd Heav’n rejoic’d, and soon repaird
Her mural breach, returning whence it rowld.
Sole Victor from th’ expulsion of his Foes
_Messiah_ his triumphal Chariot turnd:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye witnesses of his Almightie Acts,
With Jubilie advanc’d; and as they went,
Shaded with branching Palme, each order bright,
Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King,
Son, Heire, and Lord, to him Dominion giv’n,
Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode
Triumphant through mid Heav’n, into the Courts
And Temple of his mightie Father Thron’d
On high; who into Glorie him receav’d,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.

Thus measuring things in Heav’n by things on Earth
At thy request, and that thou maist beware
By what is past, to thee I have reveal’d
What might have else to human Race bin hid;
The discord which befel, and Warr in Heav’n
Among th’ Angelic Powers, and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld
With _Satan_, hee who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that with him
Bereavd of happiness thou maist partake
His punishment, Eternal miserie;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite don against the most High,
Thee once to gaine Companion of his woe.
But list’n not to his Temptations, warne
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard
By terrible Example the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.

       THE END OF THE SIXTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST.





  BOOK VII.

Descend from Heav’n _Urania_, by that name
If rightly thou art call’d, whose Voice divine
Following, above th’ _Olympian_ Hill I soare,
Above the flight of _Pegasean_ wing.
The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top
Of old _Olympus_ dwell’st, but Heav’nlie borne,
Before the Hills appeerd, or Fountain flow’d,
Thou with Eternal wisdom didst converse,
Wisdom thy Sister, and with her didst play
In presence of th’ Almightie Father, pleas’d
With thy Celestial Song.  Up led by thee
Into the Heav’n of Heav’ns I have presum’d,
An Earthlie Guest, and drawn Empyreal Aire,
Thy tempring; with like safetie guided down
Return me to my Native Element:
Least from this flying Steed unrein’d, (as once
_Bellerophon_, though from a lower Clime)
Dismounted, on th’ _Aleian_ Field I fall
Erroneous, there to wander and forlorne.
Half yet remaines unsung, but narrower bound
Within the visible Diurnal Spheare;
Standing on Earth, not rapt above the Pole,
More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchang’d
To hoarce or mute, though fall’n on evil dayes,
On evil dayes though fall’n, and evil tongues;
In darkness, and with dangers compast rouud,
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou
Visit’st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn
Purples the East: still govern thou my Song,
_Urania_, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive farr off the barbarous dissonance
Of _Bacchus_ and his Revellers, the Race
Of that wilde Rout that tore the _Thracian_ Bard
In _Rhodope_, where Woods and Rocks had Eares
To rapture, till the savage clamor dround
Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend
Her Son.  So fail not thou, who thee implores:
For thou art Heav’nlie, shee an empty dreame.

Say Goddess, what ensu’d when _Raphael_,
The affable Arch-angel, had forewarn’d
_Adam_ by dire example to beware
Apostasie, by what befell in Heaven
To those Apostates, least the like befall
In Paradise to _Adam_ or his Race,
Charg’d not to touch the interdicted Tree,
If they transgress, and slight that sole command,
So easily obeyd amid the choice
Of all tasts else to please thir appetite,
Though wandring.  He with his consorted _Eve_
The storie heard attentive, and was fill’d
With admiration, and deep Muse to heare
Of things so high and strange, things to thir thought
So unimaginable as hate in Heav’n,
And Warr so neer the Peace of God in bliss
With such confusion: but the evil soon
Driv’n back redounded as a flood on those
From whom it sprung, impossible to mix
With Blessedness.  Whence _Adam_ soon repeal’d
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now
Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know
What neerer might concern him, how this World
Of Heav’n and Earth conspicuous first began,
When, and whereof created, for what cause,
What within _Eden_ or without was done
Before his memorie, as one whose drouth
Yet scarce allay’d still eyes the current streame,
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites,
Proceeded thus to ask his Heav’nly Guest.

Great things, and full of wonder in our eares,
Farr differing from this World, thou hast reveal’d
Divine Interpreter, by favour sent
Down from the Empyrean to forewarne
Us timely of what might else have bin our loss,
Unknown, which human knowledg could not reach:
For which to the infinitly Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment
Receave with solemne purpose to observe
Immutably his sovran will, the end
Of what we are.  But since thou hast voutsaf’t
Gently for our instruction to impart
Things above Earthly thought, which yet concernd
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemd,
Deign to descend now lower, and relate
What may no less perhaps availe us known,
How first began this Heav’n which we behold
Distant so high, with moving Fires adornd
Innumerable, and this which yeelds or fills
All space, the ambient Aire wide interfus’d
Imbracing round this florid Earth, what cause
Mov’d the Creator in his holy Rest
Through all Eternitie so late to build
In _Chaos_, and the work begun, how soon
Absolv’d, if unforbid thou maist unfould
What wee, not to explore the secrets aske
Of his Eternal Empire, but the more
To magnifie his works, the more we know.
And the great Light of Day yet wants to run
Much of his Race though steep, suspens in Heav’n
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he heares,
And longer will delay to heare thee tell
His Generation, and the rising Birth
Of Nature from the unapparent Deep:
Or if the Starr of Eevning and the Moon
Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring
Silence, and Sleep listning to thee will watch,
Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song
End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine.

Thus _Adam_ his illustrous Guest besought:

And thus the Godlike Angel answerd milde.
This also thy request with caution askt
Obtaine: though to recount Almightie works
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice,
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend?
Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve
To glorifie the Maker, and inferr
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld
Thy hearing, such Commission from above
I have receav’d, to answer thy desire
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond abstain
To ask, nor let thine own inventions hope
Things not reveal’d, which th’ invisible King,
Onely Omniscient, hath supprest in Night,
To none communicable in Earth or Heaven:
Anough is left besides to search and know.
But Knowledge is as food, and needs no less
Her Temperance over Appetite, to know
In measure what the mind may well contain,
Oppresses else with Surfet, and soon turns
Wisdom to Folly, as Nourishment to Winde.

Know then, that after _Lucifer_ from Heav’n
(So call him, brighter once amidst the Host
Of Angels, then that Starr the Starrs among)
Fell with his flaming Legions through the Deep
Into his place, and the great Son returnd
Victorious with his Saints, th’ Omnipotent
Eternal Father from his Throne beheld
Thir multitude, and to his Son thus spake.

At least our envious Foe hath fail’d, who thought
All like himself rebellious, by whose aid
This inaccessible high strength, the seat
Of Deitie supream, us dispossest,
He trusted to have seis’d, and into fraud
Drew many, whom thir place knows here no more;
Yet farr the greater part have kept, I see,
Thir station, Heav’n yet populous retaines
Number sufficient to possess her Realmes
Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent
With Ministeries due and solemn Rites:
But least his heart exalt him in the harme
Already done, to have dispeopl’d Heav’n,
My damage fondly deem’d, I can repaire
That detriment, if such it be to lose
Self-lost, and in a moment will create
Another World, out of one man a Race
Of men innumerable, there to dwell,
Not here, till by degrees of merit rais’d
They open to themselves at length the way
Up hither, under long obedience tri’d,
And Earth be chang’d to Heavn, & Heav’n to Earth,
One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end.
Mean while inhabit laxe, ye Powers of Heav’n,
And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee
This I perform, speak thou, and be it don:
My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee
I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep
Within appointed bounds be Heav’n and Earth,
Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space.
Though I uncircumscrib’d my self retire,
And put not forth my goodness, which is free
To act or not, Necessitie and Chance
Approach not mee, and what I will is Fate.

So spake th’ Almightie, and to what he spake
His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect.
Immediate are the Acts of God, more swift
Then time or motion, but to human ears
Cannot without process of speech be told,
So told as earthly notion can receave.
Great triumph and rejoycing was in Heav’n
When such was heard declar’d the Almightie’s will;
Glorie they sung to the most High, good will
To future men, and in thir dwellings peace:
Glorie to him whose just avenging ire
Had driven out th’ ungodly from his sight
And th’ habitations of the just; to him
Glorie and praise, whose wisdom had ordain’d
Good out of evil to create, in stead
Of Spirits maligne a better Race to bring
Into thir vacant room, and thence diffuse
His good to Worlds and Ages infinite.
So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son
On his great Expedition now appeer’d,
Girt with Omnipotence, with Radiance crown’d
Of Majestie Divine, Sapience and Love
Immense, and all his Father in him shon.
About his Chariot numberless were pour’d
Cherub and Seraph, Potentates and Thrones,
And Vertues, winged Spirits, and Chariots wing’d,
From the Armoury of God, where stand of old
Myriads between two brazen Mountains lodg’d
Against a solemn day, harnest at hand,
Celestial Equipage; and now came forth
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit livd,
Attendant on thir Lord: Heav’n op’nd wide
Her ever during Gates, Harmonious sound
On golden Hinges moving, to let forth
The King of Glorie in his powerful Word
And Spirit coming to create new Worlds.
On heav’nly ground they stood, and from the shore
They view’d the vast immeasurable Abyss
Outrageous as a Sea, dark, wasteful, wilde,
Up from the bottom turn’d by furious windes
And surging waves, as Mountains to assault
Heav’ns highth, and with the Center mix the Pole.

Silence, ye troubl’d waves, and thou Deep, peace,
Said then th’ Omnific Word, your discord end:

Nor staid, but on the Wings of Cherubim
Uplifted, in Paternal Glorie rode
Farr into _Chaos_, and the World unborn;
For _Chaos_ heard his voice: him all his Traine
Follow’d in bright procession to behold
Creation, and the wonders of his might.
Then staid the fervid Wheeles, and in his hand
He took the golden Compasses, prepar’d
In Gods Eternal store, to circumscribe
This Universe, and all created things:
One foot he center’d, and the other turn’d
Round through the vast profunditie obscure,
And said, thus farr extend, thus farr thy bounds,
This be thy just Circumference, O World.
Thus God the Heav’n created, thus the Earth,
Matter unform’d and void: Darkness profound
Cover’d th’ Abyss: but on the watrie calme
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspred,
And vital vertue infus’d, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purg’d
The black tartareous cold infernal dregs
Adverse to life: then founded, then conglob’d
Like things to like, the rest to several place
Disparted, and between spun out the Air,
And Earth self-ballanc’t on her Center hung.

Let ther be Light, said God, and forthwith Light
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure
Sprung from the Deep, and from her Native East
To journie through the airie gloom began,
Sphear’d in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not; shee in a cloudie Tabernacle
Sojourn’d the while.  God saw the Light was good;
And light from darkness by the Hemisphere
Divided: Light the Day, and Darkness Night
He nam’d.  Thus was the first Day Eev’n and Morn:
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung
By the Celestial Quires, when Orient Light
Exhaling first from Darkness they beheld;
Birth-day of Heav’n and Earth; with joy and shout
The hollow Universal Orb they fill’d,
And touch’t thir Golden Harps, & hymning prais’d
God and his works, Creatour him they sung,
Both when first Eevning was, and when first Morn.

Again, God said, let ther be Firmament
Amid the Waters, and let it divide
The Waters from the Waters: and God made
The Firmament, expanse of liquid, pure,
Transparent, Elemental Air, diffus’d
In circuit to the uttermost convex
Of this great Round: partition firm and sure,
The Waters underneath from those above
Dividing: for as Earth, so hee the World
Built on circumfluous Waters calme, in wide
Crystallin Ocean, and the loud misrule
Of _Chaos_ farr remov’d, least fierce extreames
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame:
And Heav’n he nam’d the Firmament: So Eev’n
And Morning _Chorus_ sung the second Day.

The Earth was form’d, but in the Womb as yet
Of Waters, Embryon immature involv’d,
Appeer’d not: over all the face of Earth
Main Ocean flow’d, not idle, but with warme
Prolific humour soft’ning all her Globe,
Fermented the great Mother to conceave,
Satiate with genial moisture, when God said
Be gather’d now ye Waters under Heav’n
Into one place, and let dry Land appeer.
Immediately the Mountains huge appeer
Emergent, and thir broad bare backs upheave
Into the Clouds, thir tops ascend the Skie:
So high as heav’d the tumid Hills, so low
Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep,
Capacious bed of Waters: thither they
Hasted with glad precipitance, uprowld
As drops on dust conglobing from the drie;
Part rise in crystal Wall, or ridge direct,
For haste; such flight the great command impress’d
On the swift flouds: as Armies at the call
Of Trumpet (for of Armies thou hast heard)
Troop to thir Standard, so the watrie throng,
Wave rowling after Wave, where way they found,
If steep, with torrent rapture, if through Plaine,
Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them Rock or Hill,
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide
With Serpent errour wandring, found thir way,
And on the washie Oose deep Channels wore;
Easie, e’re God had bid the ground be drie,
All but within those banks, where Rivers now
Stream, and perpetual draw thir humid traine.
The dry Land, Earth, and the great receptacle
Of congregated Waters he call’d Seas:
And saw that it was good, and said, Let th’ Earth
Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yeilding Seed,
And Fruit Tree yeilding Fruit after her kind;
Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth.
He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then
Desert and bare, unsightly, unadorn’d,
Brought forth the tender Grass, whose verdure clad
Her Universal Face with pleasant green,
Then Herbs of every leaf, that sudden flour’d
Op’ning thir various colours, and made gay
Her bosom smelling sweet: and these scarce blown,
Forth flourish’t thick the clustring Vine, forth crept
The smelling Gourd, up stood the cornie Reed
Embattell’d in her field: add the humble Shrub,
And Bush with frizl’d hair implicit: last
Rose as in Dance the stately Trees, and spred
Thir branches hung with copious Fruit; or gemm’d
Thir Blossoms: with high Woods the Hills were crownd,
With tufts the vallies & each fountain side,
With borders long the Rivers.  That Earth now
Seemd like to Heav’n, a seat where Gods might dwell,
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rain’d
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground
None was, but from the Earth a dewie Mist
Went up and waterd all the ground, and each
Plant of the field, which e’re it was in the Earth
God made, and every Herb, before it grew
On the green stemm; God saw that it was good:
So Eev’n and Morn recorded the Third Day.

Again th’ Almightie spake: Let there be Lights
High in th’ expanse of Heaven to divide
The Day from Night; and let them be for Signes,
For Seasons, and for Dayes, and circling Years,
And let them be for Lights as I ordaine
Thir Office in the Firmament of Heav’n
To give Light on the Earth; and it was so.
And God made two great Lights, great for thir use
To Man, the greater to have rule by Day,
The less by Night alterne: and made the Starrs,
And set them in the Firmament of Heav’n
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the Day
In thir vicissitude, and rule the Night,
And Light from Darkness to divide.  God saw,
Surveying his great Work, that it was good:
For of Celestial Bodies first the Sun
A mightie Spheare he fram’d, unlightsom first,
Though of Ethereal Mould: then form’d the Moon
Globose, and everie magnitude of Starrs,
And sowd with Starrs the Heav’n thick as a field:
Of Light by farr the greater part he took,
Transplanted from her cloudie Shrine, and plac’d
In the Suns Orb, made porous to receive
And drink the liquid Light, firm to retaine
Her gather’d beams, great Palace now of Light.
Hither as to thir Fountain other Starrs
Repairing, in thir gold’n Urns draw Light,
And hence the Morning Planet guilds his horns;
By tincture or reflection they augment
Thir small peculiar, though from human sight
So farr remote, with diminution seen.
First in his East the glorious Lamp was seen,
Regent of Day, and all th’ Horizon round
Invested with bright Rayes, jocond to run
His Longitude through Heav’ns high rode: the gray
Dawn, and the _Pleiades_ before him danc’d
Shedding sweet influence: less bright the Moon,
But opposite in leveld West was set
His mirror, with full face borrowing her Light
From him, for other light she needed none
In that aspect, and still that distance keepes
Till night, then in the East her turn she shines,
Revolvd on Heav’ns great Axle, and her Reign
With thousand lesser Lights dividual holds,
With thousand thousand Starres, that then appeer’d
Spangling the Hemisphere: then first adornd
With thir bright Luminaries that Set and Rose,
Glad Eevning & glad Morn crownd the fourth day.

And God said, let the Waters generate
Reptil with Spawn abundant, living Soule:
And let Fowle flie above the Earth, with wings
Displayd on the op’n Firmament of Heav’n.
And God created the great Whales, and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously
The waters generated by thir kindes,
And every Bird of wing after his kinde;
And saw that it was good, and bless’d them, saying,
Be fruitful, multiply, and in the Seas
And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill;
And let the Fowle be multiply’d on the Earth.
Forthwith the Sounds and Seas, each Creek & Bay
With Frie innumerable swarme, and Shoales
Of Fish that with thir Finns and shining Scales
Glide under the green Wave, in Sculles that oft
Bank the mid Sea: part single or with mate
Graze the Sea weed thir pasture, & through Groves
Of Coral stray, or sporting with quick glance
Show to the Sun thir wav’d coats dropt with Gold,
Or in thir Pearlie shells at ease, attend
Moist nutriment, or under Rocks thir food
In jointed Armour watch: on smooth the Seale,
And bended Dolphins play: part huge of bulk
Wallowing unweildie, enormous in thir Gate
Tempest the Ocean: there Leviathan
Hugest of living Creatures, on the Deep
Stretcht like a Promontorie sleeps or swimmes,
And seems a moving Land, and at his Gilles
Draws in, and at his Trunck spouts out a Sea.
Mean while the tepid Caves, and Fens and shoares
Thir Brood as numerous hatch, from the Egg that soon
Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclos’d
Thir callow young, but featherd soon and fledge
They summ’d thir Penns, and soaring th’ air sublime
With clang despis’d the ground, under a cloud
In prospect; there the Eagle and the Stork
On Cliffs and Cedar tops thir Eyries build:
Part loosly wing the Region, part more wise
In common, rang’d in figure wedge thir way,
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth
Thir Aierie Caravan high over Sea’s
Flying, and over Lands with mutual wing
Easing thir flight; so stears the prudent Crane
Her annual Voiage, born on Windes; the Aire
Floats, as they pass, fann’d with unnumber’d plumes:
From Branch to Branch the smaller Birds with song
Solac’d the Woods, and spred thir painted wings
Till Ev’n, nor then the solemn Nightingal
Ceas’d warbling, but all night tun’d her soft layes:
Others on Silver Lakes and Rivers Bath’d
Thir downie Brest; the Swan with Arched neck
Between her white wings mantling proudly, Rowes
Her state with Oarie feet: yet oft they quit
The Dank, and rising on stiff Pennons, towre
The mid Aereal Skie: Others on ground
Walk’d firm; the crested Cock whose clarion sounds
The silent hours, and th’ other whose gay Traine
Adorns him, colour’d with the Florid hue
Of Rainbows and Starrie Eyes.  The Waters thus
With Fish replenisht, and the Aire with Fowle,
Ev’ning and Morn solemniz’d the Fift day.

The Sixt, and of Creation last arose
With Eevning Harps and Mattin, when God said,
Let th’ Earth bring forth Fowle living in her kinde,
Cattel and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth,
Each in their kinde.  The Earth obey’d, and strait
Op’ning her fertil Woomb teem’d at a Birth
Innumerous living Creatures, perfet formes,
Limb’d and full grown: out of the ground up-rose
As from his Laire the wilde Beast where he wonns
In Forrest wilde, in Thicket, Brake, or Den;
Among the Trees in Pairs they rose, they walk’d:
The Cattel in the Fields and Meddowes green:
Those rare and solitarie, these in flocks
Pasturing at once, and in broad Herds upsprung:
The grassie Clods now Calv’d, now half appeer’d
The Tawnie Lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from Bonds,
And Rampant shakes his Brinded main; the Ounce,
The Libbard, and the Tyger, as the Moale
Rising, the crumbl’d Earth above them threw
In Hillocks; the swift Stag from under ground
Bore up his branching head: scarse from his mould
_Behemoth_ biggest born of Earth upheav’d
His vastness: Fleec’t the Flocks and bleating rose,
As Plants: ambiguous between Sea and Land
The River Horse and scalie Crocodile.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Insect or Worme; those wav’d thir limber fans
For wings, and smallest Lineaments exact
In all the Liveries dect of Summers pride
With spots of Gold and Purple, azure and green:
These as a line thir long dimension drew,
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all
Minims of Nature; some of Serpent kinde
Wondrous in length and corpulence involv’d
Thir Snakie foulds, and added wings.  First crept
The Parsimonious Emmet, provident
Of future, in small room large heart enclos’d,
Pattern of just equalitie perhaps
Hereafter, join’d in her popular Tribes
Of Commonaltie: swarming next appeer’d
The Femal Bee that feeds her Husband Drone
Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells
With Honey stor’d: the rest are numberless,
And thou thir Natures know’st, and gav’st them Names,
Needlest to thee repeaed; nor unknown
The Serpent suttl’st Beast of all the field,
Of huge extent somtimes, with brazen Eyes
And hairie Main terrific, though to thee
Not noxious, but obedient at thy call.
Now Heav’n in all her Glorie shon, and rowld
Her motions, as the great first-Movers hand
First wheeld thir course; Earth in her rich attire
Consummate lovly smil’d; Aire, Water, Earth,
By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walkt
Frequent; and of the Sixt day yet remain’d;
There wanted yet the Master work, the end
Of all yet don; a Creature who not prone
And Brute as other Creatures, but endu’d
With Sanctitie of Reason, might erect
His Stature, and upright with Front serene
Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heav’n,
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Descends, thither with heart and voice and eyes
Directed in Devotion, to adore
And worship God Supream, who made him chief
Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father (For where is not hee
Present) thus to his Son audibly spake.

Let us make now Man in our image, Man
In our similitude, and let them rule
Over the Fish and Fowle of Sea and Aire,
Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth,
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
This said, he formd thee, _Adam_, thee O Man
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breath’d
The breath of Life; in his own Image hee
Created thee, in the Image of God
Express, and thou becam’st a living Soul.
Male he created thee, but thy consort
Femal for Race; then bless’d Mankinde, and said,
Be fruitful, multiplie, and fill the Earth,
Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold
Over Fish of the Sea, and Fowle of the Aire,
And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
Wherever thus created, for no place
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou know’st
He brought thee into this delicious Grove,
This Garden, planted with the Trees of God,
Delectable both to behold and taste;
And freely all thir pleasant fruit for food
Gave thee, all sorts are here that all th’ Earth yeelds,
Varietie without end; but of the Tree
Which tasted works knowledge of Good and Evil,
Thou mai’st not; in the day thou eat’st, thou di’st;
Death is the penaltie impos’d, beware,
And govern well thy appetite, least sin
Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death.
Here finish’d hee, and all that he had made
View’d, and behold all was entirely good;
So Ev’n and Morn accomplish’d the Sixt day:
Yet not till the Creator from his work
Desisting, though unwearied, up returnd
Up to the Heav’n of Heav’ns his high abode,
Thence to behold this new created World
Th’ addition of his Empire, how it shew’d
In prospect from his Throne, how good, how faire,
Answering his great Idea.  Up he rode
Followd with acclamation and the sound
Symphonious of ten thousand Harpes that tun’d
Angelic harmonies: the Earth, the Aire
Resounded, (thou remember’st, for thou heardst)
The Heav’ns and all the Constellations rung,
The Planets in thir stations list’ning stood,
While the bright Pomp ascended jubilant.
Open, ye everlasting Gates, they sung,
Open, ye Heav’ns, your living dores; let in
The great Creator from his work returnd
Magnificent, his Six days work, a World;
Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deigne
To visit oft the dwellings of just Men
Delighted, and with frequent intercourse
Thither will send his winged Messengers
On errands of supernal Grace.  So sung
The glorious Train ascending: He through Heav’n,
That open’d wide her blazing Portals, led
To Gods Eternal house direct the way,
A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold
And pavement Starrs, as Starrs to thee appeer,
Seen in the Galaxie, that Milkie way
Which nightly as a circling Zone thou seest
Pouderd with Starrs.  And now on Earth the Seaventh
Eev’ning arose in _Eden_, for the Sun
Was set, and twilight from the East came on,
Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount
Of Heav’ns high-seated top, th’ Impereal Throne
Of Godhead, fixt for ever firm and sure,
The Filial Power arriv’d, and sate him down
With his great Father (for he also went
Invisible, yet staid (such priviledge
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordain’d,
Author and end of all things, and from work
Now resting, bless’d and hallowd the Seav’nth day,
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept; the Harp
Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe,
And Dulcimer, all Organs of sweet stop,
All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire
Temper’d soft Tunings, intermixt with Voice
Choral or Unison: of incense Clouds
Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount.
Creation and the Six dayes acts they sung,
Great are thy works, _Jehovah_, infinite
Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue
Relate thee; greater now in thy return
Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day
Thy Thunders magnifi’d; but to create
Is greater then created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound
Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostat and thir Counsels vaine
Thou hast repeld, while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers.  Who seekes
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou usest, and from thence creat’st more good.
Witness this new-made World, another Heav’n
From Heaven Gate not farr, founded in view
On the cleer _Hyaline_, the Glassie Sea;
Of amplitude almost immense, with Starr’s
Numerous, and every Starr perhaps a World
Of destind habitation; but thou know’st
Thir seasons: among these the seat of men,
Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus’d,
Thir pleasant dwelling place.  Thrice happie men,
And sons of men, whom God hath thus advanc’t,
Created in his Image, there to dwell
And worship him, and in reward to rule
Over his Works, on Earth, in Sea, or Air,
And multiply a Race of Worshippers
Holy and just: thrice happie if they know
Thir happiness, and persevere upright.

So sung they, and the Empyrean rung,
With _Halleluiahs_: Thus was Sabbath kept.
And thy request think now fulfill’d, that ask’d
How first this World and face of things began,
And what before thy memorie was don
From the beginning, that posteritie
Informd by thee might know; if else thou seekst
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.

To whom thus _Adam_ gratefully repli’d.
What thanks sufficient, or what recompence
Equal have I to render thee, Divine
Hystorian, who thus largely hast allayd
The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf’t
This friendly condescention to relate
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
VVith wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glorie attributed to the high
Creator; some thing yet of doubt remaines,
VVhich onely thy solution can resolve.
VVhen I behold this goodly Frame, this VVorld
Of Heav’n and Earth consisting, and compute,
Thir magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a graine,
An Atom, with the Firmament compar’d
And all her numberd Starrs, that seem to rowle
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Thir distance argues and thir swift return
Diurnal) meerly to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night; in all thir vast survey
Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler Bodies to create,
Greater so manifold to this one use,
For aught appeers, and on thir Orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated, while the sedentarie Earth,
That better might with farr less compass move,
Serv’d by more noble then her self, attaines
Her end without least motion, and receaves,
As Tribute such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number failes.

So spake our Sire, and by his count’nance seemd
Entring on studious thoughts abstruse, which _Eve_
Perceaving where she sat retir’d in sight,
With lowliness Majestic from her seat,
And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours,
To visit how they prosper’d, bud and bloom,
Her Nurserie; they at her coming sprung
And toucht by her fair tendance gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her eare
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserv’d,
_Adam_ relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferr’d
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; hee, she knew would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleas’d her.  O when meet now
Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joyn’d?
With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went;
Not unattended, for on her as Queen
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot Darts of desire
Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight.
And _Raphael_ now to _Adam_’s doubt propos’d
Benevolent and facil thus repli’d.

To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heav’n
Is as the Book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learne
His Seasons, Hours, or Days, or Months, or Yeares:
This to attain, whether Heav’n move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reck’n right, the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scann’d by them who ought
Rather admire; or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heav’ns
Hath left to thir disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at thir quaint Opinions wide
Hereafter, when they come to model Heav’n
And calculate the Starrs, how they will weild
The mightie frame, how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appeerances, how gird the Sphear
With Centric and Eccentric scribl’d o’re,
Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb:
Alreadie by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy ofspring, and supposest
That Bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heav’n such journies run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves
The benefit: consider first, that Great
Or Bright inferrs not Excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heav’n, so small,
Nor glistering, may of solid good containe
More plenty then the Sun that barren shines,
Whose vertue on it self workes no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd
His beams, unactive else, thir vigor find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries
Officious, but to thee Earths habitant.
And for the Heav’ns wide Circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his Line stretcht out so farr;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodg’d in a small partition, and the rest
Ordain’d for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those Circles attribute,
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could adde
Speed almost Spiritual; mee thou thinkst not slow,
Who since the Morning hour set out from Heav’n
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arriv’d
In _Eden_, distance inexpressible
By Numbers that have name.  But this I urge,
Admitting Motion in the Heav’ns, to shew
Invalid that which thee to doubt it mov’d;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.
God to remove his wayes from human sense,
Plac’d Heav’n from Earth so farr, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might erre in things too high,
And no advantage gaine.  What if the Sun
Be Center to the World, and other Starrs
By his attractive vertue and thir own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Thir wandring course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou seest, and what if sev’nth to these
The Planet Earth, so stedfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Sphears thou must ascribe,
Mov’d contrarie with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb suppos’d,
Invisible else above all Starrs, the Wheele
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy beleefe,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Travelling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray.  What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous aire,
To the terrestrial Moon be as a Starr
Enlightning her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,
Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou seest
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her soft’nd Soile, for some to eate
Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps
With thir attendant Moons thou wilt descrie
Communicating Male and Femal Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,
Stor’d in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossest
By living Soule, desert and desolate,
Onely to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyd so farr
Down to this habitable, which returnes
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heav’n
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun,
Hee from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or Shee from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev’n,
And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and feare;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever plac’t, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise
And thy faire _Eve_; Heav’n is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowlie wise:
Think onely what concernes thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus farr hath been reveal’d
Not of Earth onely but of highest Heav’n.

To whom thus _Adam_ cleerd of doubt, repli’d.
How fully hast thou satisfi’d mee, pure
Intelligence of Heav’n, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandring thoughts, and notions vaine.
But apt the Mind or Fancie is to roave
Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end;
Till warn’d, or by experience taught, she learne,
That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and suttle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
And renders us in things that most concerne
Unpractis’d, unprepar’d, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence haply mention may arise
Of somthing not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deign’d.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear mee relate
My Storie, which perhaps thou hast not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou seest
How suttly to detaine thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heav’n,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my eare
Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labour, at the houre
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbu’d, bring to thir sweetness no satietie.

To whom thus _Raphael_ answer’d heav’nly meek.
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also pour’d,
Inward and outward both, his image faire:
Speaking or mute all comliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion formes.
Nor less think wee in Heav’n of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the wayes of God with Man:
For God we see hath honour’d thee, and set
On Man his equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Farr on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squar’d in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issu’d forth a spie,
Or enemie, while God was in his work,
Least hee incenst at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixt.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Sovran King, and to enure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricado’d strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and lowd lament, and furious rage.
Glad we return’d up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Eev’ning: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleas’d with thy words no less then thou with mine.

So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induc’d me.  As new wak’t from soundest sleep
Soft on the flourie herb I found me laid
In Balmie Sweat, which with his Beames the Sun
Soon dri’d, and on the reaking moisture fed.
Strait toward Heav’n my wondring Eyes I turnd,
And gaz’d a while the ample Skie, till rais’d
By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
As thitherward endevoring, and upright
Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plaines,
And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these,
Creatures that livd, and movd, and walk’d, or flew,
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smil’d,
With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow’d.
My self I then perus’d, and Limb by Limb
Survey’d, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, as lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tri’d, and forthwith spake,
My Tongue obey’d and readily could name
What e’re I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, faire Light,
And thou enlight’nd Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plaines,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power praeeminent;
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier then I know.
While thus I call’d, and stray’d I knew not whither,
From where I first drew Aire, and first beheld
This happie Light, when answer none return’d,
On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours
Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seis’d
My droused sense, untroubl’d, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently mov’d
My Fancy to believe I yet had being,
And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
And said, thy Mansion wants thee, _Adam_, rise,
First Man, of Men innumerable ordain’d
First Father, call’d by thee I come thy Guide
To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepar’d.
So saying, by the hand he took me rais’d,
And over Fields and Waters, as in Aire
Smooth sliding without step, last led me up
A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plaine,
A Circuit wide, enclos’d, with goodliest Trees
Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
Of Earth before scarse pleasant seemd.  Each Tree
Load’n with fairest Fruit, that hung to the Eye
Tempting, stirr’d in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eate; whereat I wak’d, and found
Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowd: Here had new begun
My wandring, had not hee who was my Guide
Up hither, from among the Trees appeer’d,
Presence Divine.  Rejoycing, but with aw
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: he rear’d me, & Whom thou soughtst I am,
Said mildely, Author of all this thou seest
Above, or round about thee or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eate:
Of every Tree that in the Garden growes
Eate freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation brings
Knowledg of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith,
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life,
Remember what I warne thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eat’st thereof, my sole command
Transgrest, inevitably thou shalt dye;
From that day mortal, and this happie State
Shalt loose, expell’d from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow.  Sternly he pronounc’d
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine eare, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his cleer aspect
Return’d and gratious purpose thus renew’d.
Not onely these fair bounds, but all the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Aire, Beast, Fish, and Fowle.
In signe whereof each Bird and Beast behold
After thir kindes; I bring them to receave
From thee thir Names, and pay thee fealtie
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within thir watry residence,
Not hither summond, since they cannot change
Thir Element to draw the thinner Aire.
As thus he spake, each Bird and Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These cowring low
With blandishment, each Bird stoop’d on his wing.
I nam’d them, as they pass’d, and understood
Thir Nature, with such knowledg God endu’d
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heav’nly vision thus presum’d.

O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankinde, or aught then mankinde higher,
Surpassest farr my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou hast provided all things: but with mee
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more bright’nd, thus repli’d.

What call’st thou solitude, is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Aire
Replenisht, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know’st thou not
Thir language and thir wayes, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and beare rule; thy Realm is large.
So spake the Universal Lord, and seem’d
So ordering.  I with leave of speech implor’d,
And humble deprecation thus repli’d.

Let not my words offend thee, Heav’nly Power,
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferiour farr beneath me set?
Among unequals what societie
Can sort, what harmonie or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Giv’n and receiv’d; but in disparitie
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoyce
Each with thir kinde, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combin’d;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowle
So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all.

Whereto th’ Almighty answer’d, not displeas’d.
A nice and suttle happiness I see
Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice
Of thy Associates, _Adam_, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitarie.
What thinkst thou then of mee, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possest
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternitie, for none I know
Second to mee or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferiour, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?

He ceas’d, I lowly answer’d.  To attaine
The highth and depth of thy Eternal wayes
All human thoughts come short, Supream of things;
Thou in thy self art perfet, and in thee
Is no deficience found; not so is Man,
But in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Shouldst propagat, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multipli’d,
In unitie defective, which requires
Collateral love, and deerest amitie.
Thou in thy secresie although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied, seek’st not
Social communication, yet so pleas’d,
Canst raise thy Creature to what highth thou wilt
Of Union or Communion, deifi’d;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in thir wayes complacence find.
Thus I embold’nd spake, and freedom us’d
Permissive, and acceptance found, which gain’d
This answer from the gratious voice Divine.

Thus farr to try thee, _Adam_, I was pleas’d,
And finde thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou hast rightly nam’d, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak’st,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such companie as then thou saw’st
Intended thee, for trial onely brought,
To see how thou could’st judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assur’d,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish, exactly to thy hearts desire.

Hee ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly by his Heav’nly overpowerd,
Which it had long stood under, streind to the highth
In that celestial Colloquie sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense,
Dazl’d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, call’d
By Nature as in aide, and clos’d mine eyes.
Mine eyes he clos’d, but op’n left the Cell
Of Fancie my internal sight, by which
Abstract as in a transe methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
Who stooping op’nd my left side, and took
From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warme,
And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh fill’d up & heal’d:
The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands;
Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex, so lovly faire,
That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now
Mean, or in her summd up, in her containd
And in her looks, which from that time infus’d
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her Aire inspir’d
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeerd, and left me dark, I wak’d
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not farr off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable: On she came,
Led by her Heav’nly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice, nor uninformd
Of nuptial Sanctitie and marriage Rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heav’n in her Eye,
In every gesture dignitie and love.
I overjoyd could not forbear aloud.

This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfill’d
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benigne,
Giver of all things faire, but fairest this
Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
Extracted; for this cause he shall forgoe
Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soule.

She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
Yet Innocence and Virgin Modestie,
Her vertue and the conscience of her worth,
That would be woo’d, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir’d,
The more desirable, or to say all,
Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turn’d;
I follow’d her, she what was Honour knew,
And with obsequious Majestie approv’d
My pleaded reason.  To the Nuptial Bowre
I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heav’n,
And happie Constellations on that houre
Shed thir selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires
Whisper’d it to the Woods, and from thir wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night
Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr
On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.
Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought
My Storie to the sum of earthly bliss
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As us’d or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, & Flours,
Walks, and the melodie of Birds; but here
Farr otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
Superiour and unmov’d, here onely weake
Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
Or Nature faild in mee, and left some part
Not proof enough such Object to sustain,
Or from my side subducting, took perhaps
More then enough; at least on her bestow’d
Too much of Ornament, in outward shew
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her th’ inferiour, in the mind
And inward Faculties, which most excell,
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that Dominion giv’n
O’re other Creatures; yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in her self compleat, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best;
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her
Looses discount’nanc’t, and like folly shewes;
Authoritie and Reason on her waite,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and nobleness thir seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard Angelic plac’t.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.

Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part;
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident
Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav’st.
For what admir’st thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love,
Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self;
Then value: Oft times nothing profits more
Then self-esteem, grounded on just and right
Well manag’d; of that skill the more thou know’st,
The more she will acknowledge thee her Head,
And to realities yeild all her shows;
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou maist love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch whereby mankind
Is propagated seem such dear delight
Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf’t
To Cattel and each Beast; which would not be
To them made common & divulg’d, if aught
Therein enjoy’d were worthy to subdue
The Soule of Man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her societie thou findst
Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou dost well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat
In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heav’nly Love thou maist ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.

To whom thus half abash’t _Adam_ repli’d.
Neither her out-side formd so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kindes
(Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions, mixt with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign’d
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soule;
Harmonie to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the eare.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blam’st me not, for love thou saist
Leads up to Heav’n, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heav’nly Spirits, and how thir Love
Express they, by looks onely, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?

To whom the Angel with a smile that glow’d
Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue,
Answer’d.  Let it suffice thee that thou know’st
Us happie, and without Love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy’st
(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy
In eminence, and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joynt, or limb, exclusive barrs:
Easier then Air with Air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrain’d conveyance need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
_Hesperean_ sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happie, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed least Passion sway
Thy Judgement to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is plac’t; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoyce,
And all the Blest: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrement it lies.
Perfet within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.

So saying, he arose; whom _Adam_ thus
Follow’d with benediction.  Since to part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honour’d ever
With grateful Memorie: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return.

So parted they, the Angel up to Heav’n
From the thick shade, and _Adam_ to his Bowre.

       THE END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK VIII.

No more of talk where God or Angel Guest
With Man, as with his Friend, familiar us’d
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast, permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblam’d: I now must change
Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt
And disobedience: On the part of Heav’n
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement giv’n,
That brought into this World a world of woe,
Sinne and her shadow Death, and Miserie
Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument
Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth
Of stern _Achilles_ on his Foe pursu’d
Thrice Fugitive about _Troy_ Wall; or rage
Of _Turnus_ for _Lavinia_ disespous’d,
Or _Neptun’s_ ire or _Juno’s_, that so long
Perplex’d the _Greek_ and _Cytherea’s_ Son;
If answerable style I can obtaine
Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes
Her nightly visitation unimplor’d,
And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires
Easie my unpremeditated Verse:
Since first this subject for Heroic Song
Pleas’d me long choosing, and beginning late;
Not sedulous by Nature to indite
Warrs, hitherto the onely Argument
Heroic deem’d, chief maistrie to dissect
With long and tedious havoc fabl’d Knights
In Battels feign’d; the better fortitude
Of Patience and Heroic Martyrdom
Unsung; or to describe Races and Games,
Or tilting Furniture, emblazon’d Shields,
Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds;
Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights
At Joust and Torneament; then marshal’d Feast
Serv’d up in Hall with Sewers, and Seneshals;
The skill of Artifice or Office mean,
Not that which justly gives Heroic name
To Person or to Poem.  Mee of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument
Remaines, sufficient of it self to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climat, or Years damp my intended wing
Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine,
Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear.

The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr
Of _Hesperus_, whose Office is to bring
Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter
Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end
Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round:
When _Satan_ who late fled before the threats
Of _Gabriel_ out of _Eden_, now improv’d
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On mans destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless return’d.
By Night he fled, and at Midnight return’d
From compassing the Earth, cautious of day,
Since _Uriel_ Regent of the Sun descri’d
His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim
That kept thir watch; thence full of anguish driv’n,
The space of seven continu’d Nights he rode
With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line
He circl’d, four times cross’d the Carr of Night
From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure;
On the eighth return’d, and on the Coast averse
From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way.  There was a place,
Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change,
Where _Tigris_ at the foot of Paradise
Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a Fountain by the Tree of Life;
In with the River sunk, and with it rose
Satan involv’d in rising Mist, then sought
Where to lie hid; Sea he had searcht and Land
From _Eden_ over _Pontus_, and the Poole
_Maeotis_, up beyond the River _Ob_;
Downward as farr Antartic; and in length
West from _Orantes_ to the Ocean barr’d
At _Darien_, thence to the Land where flowes
_Ganges_ and _Indus:_ thus the Orb he roam’d
With narrow search; and with inspection deep
Consider’d every Creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found
The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolv’d, his final sentence chose
Fit Vessel, fittest Imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for in the wilie Snake,
Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native suttletie
Proceeding, which in other Beasts observ’d
Doubt might beget of Diabolic pow’r
Active within beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolv’d, but first from inward griefe
His bursting passion into plaints thus pour’d:

O Earth, how like to Heav’n, if not preferrd
More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
For what God after better worse would build?
Terrestrial Heav’n, danc’t round by other Heav’ns
That shine, yet bear thir bright officious Lamps,
Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all thir precious beams
Of sacred influence: As God in Heav’n
Is Center, yet extends to all, so thou
Centring receav’st from all those Orbs; in thee,
Not in themselves, all thir known vertue appeers
Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth
Of Creatures animate with gradual life
Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summ’d up in Man.
With what delight could I have walkt thee round
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of Hill and Vallie, Rivers, Woods and Plaines,
Now Land, now Sea, & Shores with Forrest crownd,
Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these
Find place or refuge; and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries; all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heav’n much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heav’n
To dwell, unless by maistring Heav’ns Supreame;
Nor hope to be my self less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I though thereby worse to me redound:
For onely in destroying I finde ease
To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyd,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linkt in weal or woe,
In wo then; that destruction wide may range:
To mee shall be the glorie sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marr’d
What he _Almightie_ styl’d, six Nights and Days
Continu’d making, and who knows how long
Before had bin contriving, though perhaps
Not longer then since I in one Night freed
From servitude inglorious welnigh half
Th’ Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers: hee to be aveng’d,
And to repaire his numbers thus impair’d,
Whether such vertue spent of old now faild
More Angels to Create, if they at least
Are his Created or to spite us more,
Determin’d to advance into our room
A Creature form’d of Earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With Heav’nly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed
He effected; Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat,
Him Lord pronounc’d, and, O indignitie!
Subjected to his service Angel wings,
And flaming Ministers to watch and tend
Thir earthlie Charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread, and to elude, thus wrapt in mist
Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and prie
In every Bush and Brake, where hap may finde
The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind
Into a Beast, and mixt with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the hight of Deitie aspir’d;
But what will not Ambition and Revenge
Descend to? who aspires must down as low
As high he soard, obnoxious first or last
To basest things.  Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles;
Let it; I reck not, so it light well aim’d,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envie, this new Favorite
Of Heav’n, this Man of Clay, Son of despite,
Whom us the more to spite his Maker rais’d
From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid.

So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Drie,
Like a black mist low creeping, he held on
His midnight search, where soonest he might finde
The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found
In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowl’d,
His head the midst, well stor’d with suttle wiles:
Not yet in horrid Shade or dismal Den,
Not nocent yet, but on the grassie Herbe
Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth
The Devil enterd, and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing soon inspir’d
With act intelligential; but his sleep
Disturbd not, waiting close th’ approach of Morn.
Now whenas sacred Light began to dawne
In _Eden_ on the humid Flours, that breathd
Thir morning Incense, when all things that breath,
From th’ Earths great Altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill
With gratefull Smell, forth came the human pair
And joynd thir vocal Worship to the Quire
Of Creatures wanting voice, that done, partake
The season, prime for sweetest Sents and Aires:
Then commune how that day they best may ply
Thir growing work: for much thir work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide.
And _Eve_ first to her Husband thus began.

_Adam_, well may we labour still to dress
This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour.
Our pleasant task enjoyn’d, but till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labour grows,
Luxurious by restraint; what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wilde.  Thou therefore now advise
Or hear what to my mind first thoughts present,
Let us divide our labours, thou where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The Woodbine round this Arbour, or direct
The clasping Ivie where to climb, while I
In yonder Spring of Roses intermixt
With Myrtle, find what to redress till Noon:
For while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if no near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on, which intermits
Our dayes work brought to little, though begun
Early, and th’ hour of Supper comes unearn’d.

To whom mild answer _Adam_ thus return’d.
Sole _Eve_, Associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living Creatures deare,
Well hast thou motion’d, wel thy thoughts imployd
How we might best fulfill the work which here
God hath assign’d us, nor of me shalt pass
Unprais’d: for nothing lovelier can be found
In woman, then to studie houshold good,
And good workes in her Husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord impos’d
Labour, as to debarr us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow,
To brute deni’d, and are of Love the food,
Love not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksom toile, but to delight
He made us, and delight to Reason joyn’d.
These paths and Bowers doubt not but our joynt
Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us: But if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yeild.
For solitude somtimes is best societie,
And short retirement urges sweet returne.
But other doubt possesses me, least harm
Befall thee sever’d from me; for thou knowst
What hath bin warn’d us, what malicious Foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder,
Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each
To other speedie aide might lend at need;
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealtie from God, or to disturb
Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss
Enjoy’d by us excites his envie more;
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, stil shades thee and protects.
The Wife, where danger or dishonour lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her Husband staies,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.

To whom the Virgin Majestie of _Eve_,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austeer composure thus reply’d.

Ofspring of Heav’n and Earth, and all Earths Lord,
That such an enemie we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informd I learne,
And from the parting Angel over-heard
As in a shadie nook I stood behind,
Just then returnd at shut of Evening Flours.
But that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected not to hear.
His violence thou fearst not, being such,
As wee, not capable of death or paine,
Can either not receave, or can repell.
His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs
Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love
Can by his fraud be shak’n or seduc’t;
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy Brest,
_Adam_, misthought of her to thee so dear?

To whom with healing words _Adam_ reply’d.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal _Eve_,
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
Th’ attempt it self, intended by our Foe.
For hee who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonour foul, suppos’d
Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff
Against temptation: thou thy self with scorne
And anger wouldst resent the offer’d wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labour to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The Enemie, though bold, will hardly dare,
Or daring, first on mee th’ assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;
Suttle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels, nor think superfluous others aid.
I from the influence of thy looks receave
Access in every Vertue, in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or over-reacht
Would utmost vigor raise, and rais’d unite.
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy Vertue tri’d.

So spake domestick _Adam_ in his care
And Matrimonial Love, but _Eve_, who thought
Less attributed to her Faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd.

If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit strait’nd by a Foe,
Suttle or violent, we not endu’d
Single with like defence, wherever met,
How are we happie, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: onely our Foe
Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integritie: his foul esteeme
Sticks no dishonor on our Front, but turns
Foul on himself; then wherfore shund or feard
By us? who rather double honour gaine
From his surmise prov’d false, finde peace within,
Favour from Heav’n, our witness from th’ event.
And what is Faith, Love, Vertue unassaid
Alone, without exterior help sustaind?
Let us not then suspect our happie State
Left so imperfet by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combin’d.
Fraile is our happiness, if this be so,
And _Eden_ were no _Eden_ thus expos’d.

To whom thus _Adam_ fervently repli’d.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordaind them, his creating hand
Nothing imperfet or deficient left
Of all that he Created, much less Man,
Or ought that might his happie State secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receave no harme.
But God left free the Will, for what obeyes
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
But bid her well beware, and still erect,
Least by some faire appeering good surpris’d
She dictate false, and missinforme the Will
To do what God expresly hath forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes,
That I should mind thee oft, and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the Foe subornd,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoide
Were better, and most likelie if from mee
Thou sever not; Trial will come unsought.
Wouldst thou approve thy constancie, approve
First thy obedience; th’ other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may finde
Us both securer then thus warnd thou seemst,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, relie
On what thou hast of vertue, summon all,
For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine.

So spake the Patriarch of Mankinde, but _Eve_
Persisted, yet submiss, though last, repli’d.

With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touchd onely, that our trial, when least sought,
May finde us both perhaps farr less prepar’d,
The willinger I goe, nor much expect
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light
_Oread_ or _Dryad_, or of _Delia’s_ Traine,
Betook her to the Groves, but _Delia’s_ self
In gate surpass’d and Goddess-like deport,
Though not as shee with Bow and Quiver armd,
But with such Gardning Tools as Are yet rude,
Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought,
To _Pales_, or _Pomona_, thus adornd,
Likest she seemd, _Pomona_ when she fled
_Vertumnus_, or to _Ceres_ in her Prime,
Yet Virgin of _Proserpina_ from _Jove_.
Her long with ardent look his _Eye_ pursu’d
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Oft he to her his charge of quick returne,
Repeated, shee to him as oft engag’d
To be returnd by Noon amid the Bowre,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.
O much deceav’d, much failing, hapless _Eve_,
Of thy presum’d return! event perverse!
Thou never from that houre in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or found repose;
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades
Waited with hellish rancor imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoild of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.
For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend,
Meer Serpent in appearance, forth was come,
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might finde
The onely two of Mankinde, but in them
The whole included Race, his purposd prey.
In Bowre and Field he sought, where any tuft
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,
Thir tendance or Plantation for delight,
By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet
He sought them both, but wish’d his hap might find
_Eve_ separate, he wish’d, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanc’d, when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, _Eve_ separate he spies,
Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,
Half spi’d, so thick the Roses bushing round
About her glowd, oft stooping to support
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,
Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies
Gently with Mirtle band, mindless the while,
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,
From her best prop so farr, and storn so nigh.
Neererhe drew, and many a walk travers’d
Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palme,
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen
Among thick-wov’n Arborets and Flours
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of _Eve_:
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feign’d
Or of reviv’d _Adonis_, or renownd
_Alcinous_, host of old _Laertes_ Son,
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King
Held dalliance with his faire _Egyptian_ Spouse.
Much hee the Place admir’d, the Person more.
As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Aire,
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn, to breathe
Among the pleasant Villages and Farmes
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight,
The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,
Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,
What pleasing seemd, for her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look summs all Delight.
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This Flourie Plat, the sweet recess of _Eve_
Thus earlie, thus alone; her Heav’nly forme
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Aire
Of gesture or lest action overawd
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereav’d
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil one abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remaind
Stupidly good, of enmitie disarm’d,
Of guile, of hate, of envie, of revenge;
But the hot Hell that alwayes in him burnes,
Though in mid Heav’n, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure not for him ordain’d: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.

Thoughts, whither have he led me, with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported to forget
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying, other joy
To me is lost.  Then let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
The Woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage hautie, and of limb
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
I not; so much hath Hell debas’d, and paine
Infeebl’d me, to what I was in Heav’n.
Shee fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
Not terrible, though terrour be in Love
And beautie, not approacht by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under shew of Love well feign’d,
The way which to her ruin now I tend.

So spake the Enemie of Mankind, enclos’d
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward _Eve_
Address’d his way, not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his reare,
Circular base of rising foulds, that tour’d
Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes;
With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect
Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass
Floted redundant: pleasing was his shape,
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind
Lovelier, not those that in _Illyria_ chang’d
_Hermione_ and _Cadmus_, or the God
In _Epidaurus_; nor to which transformd
_Ammonian Jove_, or _Capitoline_ was seen,
Hee with _Olympias_, this with her who bore
_Scipio_ the highth of _Rome_.  With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feard
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind
Veres oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her Saile;
So varied hee, and of his tortuous Traine
Curld many a wanton wreath in sight of _Eve_,
To lure her Eye; shee busied heard the sound
Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as us’d
To such disport before her through the Field,
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,
Then at _Circean_ call the Herd disguis’d.
Hee boulder now, uncall’d before her stood;
But as in gaze admiring: Oft he bowd
His turret Crest, and sleek enamel’d Neck,
Fawning, and lick’d the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turnd at length
The Eye of _Eve_ to mark his play; he glad
Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.

Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou canst, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
Thy looks, the Heav’n of mildness, with disdain,
Displeas’d that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Insatiate, I thus single; nor have feard
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retir’d.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker faire,
Thee all living things gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy Celestial Beautie adore
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
Where universally admir’d; but here
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discerne
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who shouldst be seen
A Goddess among Gods, ador’d and serv’d
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.

So gloz’d the Tempter, and his Proem tun’d;
Into the Heart of _Eve_ his words made way,
Though at the voice much marveling; at length
Not unamaz’d she thus in answer spake.
What may this mean?  Language of Man pronounc’t
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense exprest?
The first at lest of these I thought deni’d
To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day
Created mute to all articulat sound;
The latter I demurre, for in thir looks
Much reason, and in thir actions oft appeers.
Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endu’d;
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How cam’st thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due.

To whom the guileful Tempter thus reply’d.
Empress of this fair World, resplendent _Eve_,
Easie to mee it is to tell thee all
What thou commandst, and right thou shouldst be obeyd:
I was at first as other Beasts that graze
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food, nor aught but food discern’d
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till on a day roaving the field, I chanc’d
A goodly Tree farr distant to behold
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixt,
Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
When from the boughes a savorie odour blow’n,
Grateful to appetite, more pleas’d my sense
Then smell of sweetest Fenel, or the Teats
Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn,
Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend thir play.
To satisfie the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolv’d
Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful perswaders, quick’nd at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urg’d me so keene.
About the Mossie Trunk I wound me soon,
For high from ground the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or _Adams_: Round the Tree
All other Beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the Tree now got, where plentie hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spar’d not, for such pleasure till that hour
At Feed or Fountain never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceave
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech
Wanted not long, though to this shape retaind.
Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep
I turnd my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considerd all things visible in Heav’n,
Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good;
But all that fair and good in thy Divine
Semblance, and in thy Beauties heav’nly Ray
United I beheld; no Fair to thine
Equivalent or second, which compel’d
Mee thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declar’d
Sovran of Creatures, universal Dame.

So talk’d the spirited sly Snake; and _Eve_
Yet more amaz’d unwarie thus reply’d.

Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The vertue of that Fruit, in thee first prov’d:
But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far?
For many are the Trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us, in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to thir provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth.

To whom the wilie Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is readie, and not long,
Beyond a row of Myrtles, on a Flat,
Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past
Of blowing Myrrh and Balme; if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.

Lead then, said _Eve_.  Hee leading swiftly rowld
In tangles, and make intricate seem strait,
To mischief swift.  Hope elevates, and joy
Bright’ns his Crest, as when a wandring Fire
Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night
Condenses, and the cold invirons round,
Kindl’d through agitation to a Flame,
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends,
Hovering and blazing with delusive Light,
Misleads th’ amaz’d Night-wanderer from his way
To Boggs and Mires, & oft through Pond or Poole,
There swallow’d up and lost, from succour farr.
So glister’d the dire Snake and into fraud
Led _Eve_ our credulous Mother, to the Tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake.

Serpent, we might have spar’d our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though Fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose vertue rest with thee,
Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch;
God so commanded, and left that Command
Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live
Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law.

To whom the Tempter guilefully repli’d.
Indeed? hath God then said that of the Fruit
Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eate,
Yet Lords declar’d of all in Earth or Aire?

To whom thus _Eve_ yet sinless.  Of the Fruit
Of each Tree in the Garden we may eate,
But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst
The Garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die.

She scarse had said, though brief, when now more bold
The Tempter, but with shew of Zeale and Love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on, and as to passion mov’d,
Fluctuats disturbd, yet comely, and in act
Rais’d, as of som great matter to begin.
As when of old som Orator renound
In _Athens_ or free _Rome_, where Eloquence
Flourishd, since mute, to som great cause addrest,
Stood in himself collected, while each part,
Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue,
Somtimes in highth began, as no delay
Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right.
So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown
The Tempter all impassiond thus began.

O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant,
Mother of Science, Now I feel thy Power
Within me cleere, not onely to discerne
Things in thir Causes, but to trace the wayes
Of highest Agents, deemd however wise.
Queen of this Universe, doe not believe
Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die:
How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life
To Knowledge?  By the Threatner, look on mee,
Mee who have touch’d and tasted, yet both live,
And life more perfet have attaind then Fate
Meant mee, by ventring higher then my Lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a pretty Trespass, and not praise
Rather your dauntless vertue, whom the pain
Of Death denounc’t, whatever thing Death be,
Deterrd not from atchieving what might leade
To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil;
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
Not just, not God; not feard then, nor obeid:
Your feare it self of Death removes the feare.
Why then was this forbid?  Why but to awe,
Why but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers; he knows that in the day
Ye Eate thereof, your Eyes that seem so cleere,
Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then
Op’nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both Good and Evil as they know.
That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet,
I of brute human, yee of human Gods.
So ye shalt die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods, death to be wisht,
Though threat’nd, which no worse then this can bring
And what are Gods that Man may not become
As they, participating God-like food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds,
I question it, for this fair Earth I see,
Warm’d by the Sun, producing every kind,
Them nothing: If they all things, who enclos’d
Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree,
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
Th’ offence, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree
Impart against his will if all be his?
Or is it envie, and can envie dwell
In heav’nly brests? these, these and many more
Causes import your need of this fair Fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste.

He ended, and his words replete with guile
Into her heart too easie entrance won:
Fixt on the Fruit she gaz’d, which to behold
Might tempt alone, and in her ears the sound
Yet rung of his perswasive words, impregn’d
With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth;
Meanwhile the hour of Noon drew on, and wak’d
An eager appetite, rais’d by the smell
So savorie of that Fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Sollicited her longing eye; yet first
Pausing a while, thus to her self she mus’d.

Great are thy Vertues, doubtless, best of Fruits,
Though kept from Man, & worthy to be admir’d,
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise hee also who forbids thy use,
Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree
Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it inferrs the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown, sure is not had, or had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions binde not.  But if Death
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then
Our inward freedom?  In the day we eate
Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die.
How dies the Serpent? hee hath eat’n and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discernes,
Irrational till then.  For us alone
Was death invented? or to us deni’d
This intellectual food, for beasts reserv’d?
For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first
Hath tasted, envies not, but brings with joy
The good befall’n him, Author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, farr from deceit or guile.
What fear I then, rather what know to feare
Under this ignorance of Good and Evil,
Of God or Death, of Law or Penaltie?
Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine,
Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste,
Of vertue to make wise: what hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both Bodie and Mind?

So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the Fruit, she pluck’d, she eat:
Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat
Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe,
That all was lost.  Back to the Thicket slunk
The guiltie Serpent, and well might, for _Eve_
Intent now wholly on her taste, naught else
Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd,
In Fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fansied so, through expectation high
Of knowledg, nor was God-head from her thought.
Greedily she ingorg’d without restraint,
And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length,
And hight’nd as with Wine, jocond and boon,
Thus to her self she pleasingly began.

O Sovran, vertuous, precious of all Trees
In Paradise, of operation blest
To Sapience, hitherto obscur’d, infam’d,
And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end
Created; but henceforth my early care,
Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise
Shall tend thee, and the fertil burden ease
Of thy full branches offer’d free to all;
Till dieted by thee I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know;
Though others envie what they cannot give;
For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here
Thus grown.  Experience, next to thee I owe,
Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind
In ignorance, thou op’nst Wisdoms way,
And giv’st access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret; Heav’n is high,
High and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies
About him.  But to _Adam_ in what sort
Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with mee, or rather not,
But keep the odds of Knowledge in my power
Without Copartner? so to add what wants
In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love,
And render me more equal, and perhaps
A thing not undesireable, somtime
Superior; for inferior who is free?
This may be well: but what if God have seen,
And Death ensue? then I shall be no more,
And _Adam_ wedded to another _Eve_,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;
A death to think.  Confirm’d then I resolve,
_Adam_ shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure; without him live no life.

So saying, from the Tree her step she turnd,
But first low Reverence don, as to the power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infus’d
Into the plant sciential sap, deriv’d
From Nectar, drink of Gods.  _Adam_ the while
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorne
Her Tresses, and her rural labours crown
As Reapers oft are wont thir Harvest Queen.
Great joy he promis’d to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delay’d;
Yet oft his heart, divine of somthing ill,
Misgave him; hee the faultring measure felt;
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree
Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met,
Scarse from the Tree returning; in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit that downie smil’d,
New gatherd, and ambrosial smell diffus’d.
To him she hasted, in her face excuse
Came Prologue, and Apologie to prompt,
Which with bland words at will she thus addrest.

Hast thou not wonderd, _Adam_, at my stay?
Thee I have misst, and thought it long, depriv’d
Thy presence, agonie of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more
Mean I to trie, what rash untri’d I sought,
The paine of absence from thy sight.  But strange
Hath bin the cause, and wonderful to heare:
This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Op’ning the way, but of Divine effect
To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste;
And hath bin tasted such; the Serpent wise,
Or not restraind as wee, or not obeying,
Hath eat’n of the fruit, and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatn’d, but thenceforth
Endu’d with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration, and with mee
Perswasively hath so prevaild, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
Th’ effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes,
Dimm erst, dilated Spirits, ampler Heart,
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss,
Tedious, unshar’d with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot
May joyne us, equal Joy, as equal Love;
Least thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce
Deitie for thee, when Fate will not permit.

Thus _Eve_ with Countnance blithe her storie told;
But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd.
On th’ other side, _Adam_, soon as he heard
The fatal Trespass don by _Eve_, amaz’d,
Astonied stood and Blank, while horror chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joynts relax’d;
From his slack hand the Garland wreath’d for _Eve_
Down drop’d, and all the faded Roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.

O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods Works, Creature in whom excell’d
Whatever can to fight or thought be found,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,
Defac’t, deflourd, and now to Death devote?
Rather how hast thou yeelded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred Fruit forbidd’n! som cursed fraud
Of Enemie hath beguil’d thee, yet unknown,
And mee with thee hath ruind, for with thee
Certain my resolution is to Die;
How can I live without thee, how forgoe
Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joyn’d,
To live again in these wilde Woods forlorn?
Should God create another _Eve_, and I
Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart; no no, I feel
The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.

So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd
Submitting to what seemd remediless,
Thus in calme mood his Words to _Eve_ he turnd.

Bold deed thou hast presum’d, adventrous _Eve_,
And peril great provok’t, who thus hast dar’d
Had it bin onely coveting to Eye
That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under banne to touch.
But past who can recall, or don undoe?
Not God omnipotent, for Fate, yet so
Perhaps thou shalt not Die, perhaps the Fact
Is not so hainous now, foretasted Fruit,
Profan’d first by the Serpent, by him first
Made common and unhallowd: ere one tastes;
Nor yet on him found deadly; he yet lives,
Lives, as thou saidst, and gaines to live as Man
Higher degree of Life, inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attaine
Proportional ascent, which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels Demi-gods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatning, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime Creatures, dignifi’d so high,
Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,
For us created, needs with us must faile,
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour loose,
Not well conceav’d of God, who though his Power
Creation could repeate, yet would be loath
Us to abolish, least the Adversary
Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God
Most Favors, who can please him long?  Mee first
He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next?
Matter of scorne, not to be given the Foe.
However I with thee have fixt my Lot,
Certain to undergoe like doom, if Death
Consort with thee, Death is to mee as Life;
So forcible within my heart I feel
The Bond of Nature draw me to my owne,
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
Our State cannot be severd, we are one,
One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.

So _Adam_, and thus _Eve_ to him repli’d.
O glorious trial of exceeding Love,
Illustrious evidence, example high!
Ingaging me to emulate, but short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attaine,
_Adam_, from whose deare side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our Union heare thee speak,
One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff
This day affords, declaring thee resolvd,
Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread
Shall separate us, linkt in Love so deare,
To undergoe with mee one Guilt, one Crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit,
Whose vertue, for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion hath presented
This happie trial of thy Love, which else
So eminently never had bin known.
Were it I thought Death menac’t would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not perswade thee, rather die
Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assur’d
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful Love unequald; but I feel
Farr otherwise th’ event, not Death, but Life
Augmented, op’nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joyes,
Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before
Hath toucht my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, _Adam_, freely taste,
And fear of Death deliver to the Windes.

So saying, she embrac’d him, and for joy
Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love
Had so enobl’d, as of choice to incurr
Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death.
In recompence (for such compliance bad
Such recompence best merits) from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupl’d not to eat
Against his better knowledge, not deceav’d,
But fondly overcome with Femal charm.
Earth trembl’d from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan,
Skie lowr’d, and muttering Thunder, som sad drops
Wept at compleating of the mortal Sin
Original; while _Adam_ took no thought,
Eating his fill, nor _Eve_ to iterate
Her former trespass fear’d, the more to soothe
Him with her lov’d societie, that now
As with new Wine intoxicated both
They swim in mirth, and fansie that they feel
Divinitie within them breeding wings
Wherewith to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit
Farr other operation first displaid,
Carnal desire enflaming, hee on _Eve_
Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him
As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burne:
Till _Adam_ thus ’gan _Eve_ to dalliance move.

_Eve_, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of Sapience no small part,
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And Palate call judicious; I the praise
Yeild thee, so well this day thou hast purvey’d.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstain’d
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wish’d,
For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.
But come, so well refresh’t, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious Fare;
For never did thy Beautie since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorn’d
With all perfections, so enflame my sense
With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now
Then ever, bountie of this vertuous Tree.

So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent, well understood
Of _Eve_, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
Her hand he seis’d, and to a shadie bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr’d
He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch,
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap.
There they thir fill of Love and Loves disport
Took largely, of thir mutual guilt the Seale,
The solace of thir sin, till dewie sleep
Oppress’d them, wearied with thir amorous play.
Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit,
That with exhilerating vapour bland
About thir spirits had plaid, and inmost powers
Made erre, was now exhal’d, and grosser sleep
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose
As from unrest, and each the other viewing,
Soon found thir Eyes how op’nd, and thir minds
How dark’nd; innocence, that as a veile
Had shadow’d them from knowing ill, was gon,
Just confidence, and native righteousness,
And honour from about them, naked left
To guiltie shame hee cover’d, but his Robe
Uncover’d more.  So rose the _Danite_ strong
_Herculean Samson_ from the Harlot-lap
Of _Philistean Dalilah_, and wak’d
Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare
Of all thir vertue: silent, and in face
Confounded long they sate, as struck’n mute,
Till _Adam_, though not less then _Eve_ abasht,
At length gave utterance to these words constraind.

O _Eve_, in evil hour thou didst give care
To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfet Mans voice, true in our Fall,
False in our promis’d Rising; since our Eyes
Op’nd we find indeed, and find we know
Both Good and Evil, Good lost and Evil got,
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honour void,
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Puritie,
Our wonted Ornaments now soild and staind,
And in our Faces evident the signes
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then.  How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, earst with joy
And rapture so oft beheld? those heav’nly shapes
Will dazle now this earthly, with thir blaze
Insufferably bright.  O might I here
In solitude live savage, in some glad
Obscur’d, where highest Woods impenetrable
To Starr or Sun-light, spread thir umbrage broad,
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more.
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may for the present serve to hide
The Parts of each from other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd,
And girded on our loyns, may cover round
Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean.

So counsel’d hee, and both together went
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renown’d,
But such as at this day to _Indians_ known
In _Malabar_ or _Decan_ spreds her Armes
Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade
High overarch’t, and echoing Walks between;
There oft the _Indian_ Herdsman shunning heate
Shelters in coole, and tends his pasturing Herds
At Loopholes cut through thickest shade: Those Leaves
They gatherd, broad as _Amazonian_ Targe,
And with what skill they had, together sowd,
To gird thir waste, vain Covering if to hide
Thir guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike
To that first naked Glorie.  Such of late
_Columbus_ found th’ _American_ to girt
With featherd Cincture, naked else and wilde
Among the Trees on Iles and woodie Shores.
Thus fenc’t, and as they thought, thir shame in part
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,
They sate them down to weep, nor onely Teares
Raind at thir Eyes, but high Winds worse within
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore
Thir inward State of Mind, calme Region once
And full of Peace, now tost and turbulent:
For Understanding rul’d not, and the Will
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe
Usurping over sovran Reason claimd
Superior sway: From thus distemperd brest,
_Adam_, estrang’d in look and alterd stile,
Speech intermitted thus to _Eve_ renewd.

Would thou hadst heark’nd to my words, & stai’d
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandring this unhappie Morn,
I know not whence possessd thee; we had then
Remaind still happie, not as now, despoild
Of all our good, sham’d, naked, miserable.
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to faile.

To whom soon mov’d with touch of blame thus _Eve_.
What words have past thy Lips, _Adam_ severe,
Imput’st thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou call’st it, which who knows
But might as ill have happ’nd thou being by,
Or to thy self perhaps: hadst thou bin there,
Or bere th’ attempt, thou couldst not have discernd
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake;
No ground of enmitie between us known,
Why hee should mean me ill, or seek to harme.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a liveless Rib.
Being as I am, why didst not thou the Head
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger as thou saidst?
Too facil then thou didst not much gainsay,
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Hadst thou bin firm and fixt in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgress’d, nor thou with mee.

To whom then first incenst _Adam_ repli’d.
Is this the Love, is the recompence
Of mine to thee, ingrateful _Eve_, exprest
Immutable when thou wert lost, not I,
Who might have liv’d and joyd immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
And am I now upbraided, as the cause
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
I warn’d thee, I admonish’d thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking Enemie
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
And force upon free Will hath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on, secure
Either to meet no danger, or to finde
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps
I also err’d in overmuch admiring
What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue
That errour now, which is become my crime,
And thou th’ accuser.  Thus it shall befall
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
Lets her Will rule; restraint she will not brook,
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,
Shee first his weak indulgence will accuse.

Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning
And of thir vain contest appeer’d no end.

       THE END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST





  BOOK IX.

Meanwhile the hainous and despightfull act
Of _Satan_ done in Paradise, and how
Hee in the Serpent had perverted _Eve_,
Her Husband shee, to taste the fatall fruit,
Was known in Heav’n; for what can scape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hinder’d not _Satan_ to attempt the minde
Of Man, with strength entire, and free Will arm’d,
Complete to have discover’d and repulst
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remember’d
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurr’d, what could they less, the penaltie,
And manifold in sin, deserv’d to fall.
Up into Heav’n from Paradise in hast
Th’ Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondring how the suttle Fiend had stoln
Entrance unseen.  Soon as th’ unwelcome news
From Earth arriv’d at Heaven Gate, displeas’d
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixt
With pitie, violated not thir bliss.
About the new-arriv’d, in multitudes
Th’ ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, thir utmost vigilance,
And easily approv’d; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder utter’d thus his voice.

Assembl’d Angels, and ye Powers return’d
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid,
Nor troubl’d at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter cross’d the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc’t
And flatter’d out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In eevn scale.  But fall’n he is, and now
What rests, but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression, Death denounc’t that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he fear’d,
By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bountie scorn’d.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr’d
All Judgement, whether in Heav’n, or Earth; or Hell.
Easie it may be seen that I intend
Mercie collegue with Justice, sending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his design’d
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntarie,
And destin’d Man himself to judge Man fall’n.

So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright
Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son
Blaz’d forth unclouded Deitie; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Express’d, and thus divinely answer’d milde.

Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heav’n and Earth to do thy will
Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov’d
Mayst ever rest well pleas’d.  I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst,
Whoever judg’d, the worst on mee must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine
Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom
On me deriv’d, yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercie, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgement, but the judg’d,
Those two; the third best absent is condemn’d,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.

Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence
_Eden_ and all the Coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing’d.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour
To fan the Earth now wak’d, and usher in
The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft windes
Brought to thir Ears, while day declin’d, they heard
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to _Adam_ call’d aloud.

Where art thou _Adam_, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off?  I miss thee here,
Not pleas’d, thus entertaind with solitude,
Where obvious dutie erewhile appear’d unsaught:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains?  Come forth.
He came, and with him _Eve_, more loth, though first
To offend, discount’nanc’t both, and discompos’d;
Love was not in thir looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despaire,
Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile.
Whence _Adam_ faultring long, thus answer’d brief.

I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice
Affraid, being naked, hid my self.  To whom
The gracious Judge without revile repli’d.

My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear’d,
But still rejoyc’t, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?

To whom thus _Adam_ sore beset repli’d.
O Heav’n! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge, either to undergoe
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remaines,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessitie
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint,
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolv’d; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceale.
This Woman whom thou mad’st to be my help,
And gav’st me as thy perfet gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seem’d to justifie the deed;
Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate.

To whom the sovran Presence thus repli’d.
Was shee thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice, or was shee made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did’st resigne thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection farr excell’d
Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seem’d,
Unseemly to beare rule, which was thy part
And person, had’st thou known thy self aright.

So having said, he thus to _Eve_ in few:
Say Woman, what is this which thou hast done?

To whom sad _Eve_ with shame nigh overwhelm’d,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abasht repli’d.

The Serpent me beguil’d and I did eate.

Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on th’ accus’d
Serpent though brute, unable to transferre
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; justly then accurst,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concern’d not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor alter’d his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom apply’d,
Though in mysterious terms, judg’d as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.

Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst
Above all Cattel, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly groveling thou shalt goe,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.

So spake this Oracle, then verifi’d
When _Jesus_ son of _Mary_ second _Eve_,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav’n,
Prince of the Aire; then rising from his Grave
Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht
In open shew, and with ascention bright
Captivity led captive through the Aire,
The Realme it self of Satan long usurpt,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn’d.

Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie
By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, hee over thee shall rule.

On _Adam_ last thus judgement he pronounc’d.
Because thou hast heark’nd to the voice of thy Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charg’d thee, saying: Thou shalt not eate thereof,
Curs’d is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thornes also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eate th’ Herb of th’ Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eate Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust returne.

 So judg’d he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,
And th’ instant stroke of Death denounc’t that day
Remov’d farr off; then pittying how they stood
Before him naked to the aire, that now
Must suffer change, disdain’d not to begin
Thenceforth the forme of servant to assume,
As when he wash’d his servants feet, so now
As Father of his Familie he clad
Thir nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid;
And thought not much to cloath his Enemies:
Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Araying cover’d from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returnd,
Into his blissful bosom reassum’d
In glory as of old, to him appeas’d
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sin’d and judg’d on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Farr into _Chaos_, since the Fiend pass’d through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.

O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his ofspring deare?  It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had return’d, with fury driv’n
By his Avenger, since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and Dominion giv’n me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on,
Or sympathie, or som connatural force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite
With secret amity things of like kinde
By secretest conveyance.  Thou my Shade
Inseparable must with mee along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficultie of passing back
Stay his returne perhaps over this Gulfe
Impassable, impervious, let us try
Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument
Of merit high to all th’ infernal Host,
Easing thir passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as thir lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.

Whom thus the meager Shadow answerd soon.
Goe whither Fate and inclination strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behinde, nor erre
The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.

So saying, with delight he snuff’d the smell
Of mortal change on Earth.  As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Against the day of Battel, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur’d
With sent of living Carcasses design’d
For death, the following day, in bloodie fight.
So sented the grim Feature, and upturn’d
His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious of his Quarrey from so farr.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste
Wide Anarchie of _Chaos_ damp and dark
Flew divers, & with Power (thir Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea
Tost up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse
Upon the _Cronian_ Sea, together drive
Mountains of Ice, that stop th’ imagin’d way
Beyond _Petsora_ Eastward, to the rich
_Cathaian_ Coast.  The aggregated Soyle
Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a Trident smote, and fix’t as firm
As _Delos_ floating once; the rest his look
Bound with _Gorgonian_ rigor not to move,
And with _Asphaltic_ slime; broad as the Gate,
Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather’d beach
They fasten’d, and the Mole immense wraught on
Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joyning to the Wall
Immoveable of this now fenceless world
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compar’d,
_Xerxes_, the Libertie of _Greece_ to yoke,
From _Susa_ his _Memnonian_ Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over _Hellespont_
Bridging his way, _Europe_ with _Asia_ joyn’d,
And scourg’d with many a stroak th’ indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vext Abyss, following the track
Of _Satan_, to the selfsame place where hee
First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe
From out of _Chaos_ to the outside bare
Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant
And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space
The Confines met of Empyrean Heav’n
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interpos’d; three sev’ral wayes
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now thir way to Earth they had descri’d,
To Paradise first tending, when behold
_Satan_ in likeness of an Angel bright
Betwixt the _Centaure_ and the _Scorpion_ stearing
His _Zenith_, while the Sun in _Aries_ rose:
Disguis’d he came, but those his Children dear
Thir Parent soon discern’d, though in disguise.
Hee, after _Eve_ seduc’t, unminded slunk
Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By _Eve_, though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her Husband, saw thir shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them, terrifi’d
Hee fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth
Might suddenly inflict; that past, return’d
By Night, and listning where the hapless Paire
Sate in thir sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time.  With joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return’d,
And at the brink of _Chaos_, neer the foot
Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop’t
Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear.
Great joy was at thir meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendious Bridge his joy encreas’d.
Long hee admiring stood, till Sin, his faire
Inchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.

O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds,
Thy Trophies, which thou view’st as not thine own,
Thou art thir Author and prime Architect:
For I no sooner in my Heart divin’d,
My Heart, which by a secret harmonie
Still moves with thine, joyn’d in connexion sweet,
That thou on Earth hadst prosper’d, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast atchiev’d our libertie, confin’d
Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow’rd
To fortifie thus farr, and overlay
With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.
Thine now is all this World, thy vertue hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gain’d
With odds what Warr hath lost, and fully aveng’d
Our foile in Heav’n; here thou shalt Monarch reign,
There didst not; there let him still Victor sway,
As Battel hath adjudg’d, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide
Of all things, parted by th’ Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or trie thee now more dang’rous to his Throne.

Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answerd glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have giv’n to be the Race
Of _Satan_ (for I glorie in the name,
Antagonist of Heav’ns Almightie King)
Amply have merited of me, of all
Th’ Infernal Empire, that so neer Heav’ns dore
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious Work, & made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
Of easie thorough-fare.  Therefore while I
Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoyce,
You two this way, among those numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell & Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
Dominion exercise and in the Aire,
Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declar’d,
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might
Issuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death expos’d by my exploit.
If your joynt power prevaile, th’ affaires of Hell
No detriment need feare, goe and be strong.

So saying he dismiss’d them, they with speed
Thir course through thickest Constellations held
Spreading thir bane; the blasted Starrs lookt wan,
And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips
Then sufferd.  Th’ other way _Satan_ went down
The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side
Disparted _Chaos_ over built exclaimd,
And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild,
That scorn’d his indignation: through the Gate,
Wide open and unguarded, _Satan_ pass’d,
And all about found desolate; for those
Appointed to sit there, had left thir charge,
Flown to the upper World; the rest were all
Farr to the inland retir’d, about the walls
Of _Pandemonium_, Citie and proud seate
Of _Lucifer_, so by allusion calld,
Of that bright Starr to _Satan_ paragond.
There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand
In Council sate, sollicitous what chance
Might intercept thir Emperour sent, so hee
Departing gave command, and they observ’d.
As when the _Tartar_ from his _Russian_ Foe
By _Astracan_ over the Snowie Plaines
Retires, or _Bactrian_ Sophi from the hornes
Of _Turkish_ Crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The Realme of _Aladule_, in his retreate
To _Tauris_ or _Casbeen_.  So these the late
Heav’n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell
Many a dark League, reduc’t in careful Watch
Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer from the search
Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt,
In shew plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, past; and from the dore
Of that _Plutonian_ Hall, invisible
Ascended his high Throne, which under state
Of richest texture spred, at th’ upper end
Was plac’t in regal lustre.  Down a while
He sate, and round about him saw unseen:
At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head
And shape Starr bright appeer’d, or brighter, clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: All amaz’d
At that so sudden blaze the _Stygian_ throng
Bent thir aspect, and whom they wish’d beheld,
Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th’ acclaime:
Forth rush’d in haste the great consulting Peers,
Rais’d from thir dark _Divan_, and with like joy
Congratulant approach’d him, who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention won.

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
For in possession such, not onely of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returnd
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
Abominable, accurst, the house of woe,
And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great atchiev’d.  Long were to tell
What I have don, what sufferd, with what paine
Voyag’d the unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav’d
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toild out my uncouth passage, forc’t to ride
Th’ untractable Abysse, plung’d in the womb
Of unoriginal _Night_ and _Chaos_ wilde,
That jealous of thir secrets fiercely oppos’d
My journey strange, with clamorous uproare
Protesting Fate supreame; thence how I found
The new created World, which fame in Heav’n
Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful
Of absolute perfection, therein Man
Plac’t in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happie: Him by fraud I have seduc’d
From his Creator, and the more to increase
Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv’n up
Both his beloved Man and all his World,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour or allarme,
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have rul’d.
True is, mee also he hath judg’d, or rather
Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape
Man I deceav’d: that which to mee belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruise his heel;
His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A World who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain?  Ye have th’ account
Of my performance: What remaines, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliss.

So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Thir universal shout and high applause
To fill his eare, when contrary he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long
Had leasure, wondring at himself now more;
His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,
His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power
Now rul’d him, punisht in the shape he sin’d,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transform’d
Alike, to Serpents all as accessories
To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters, head and taile,
Scorpion and Asp, and _Amphisbaena_ dire,
_Cerastes_ hornd, _Hydrus_, and _Ellops_ drear,
And _Dipsas_ (Not so thick swarm’d once the Soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle
_Ophiusa_) but still greatest hee the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun
Ingenderd in the _Pythian_ Vale on slime,
Huge _Python_, and his Power no less he seem’d
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him follow’d issuing forth to th’ open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
Heav’n-fall’n, in station stood or just array,
Sublime with expectation when to see
In Triumph issuing forth thir glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathie; for what they saw,
They felt themselvs now changing; down thir arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renew’d, and the dire form
Catcht by Contagion, like in punishment,
As in thir crime.  Thus was th’ applause they meant,
Turnd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from thir own mouths.  There stood
A Grove hard by, sprung up with this thir change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Thir penance, laden with fair Fruit, like that
VVhich grew in Paradise, the bait of _Eve_
Us’d by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Thir earnest eyes they fix’d, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now ris’n, to work them furder woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,
But on they rould in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks
That curld _Megaera_: greedily they pluck’d
The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew
Neer that bituminous Lake where _Sodom_ flam’d;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceav’d; they fondly thinking to allay
Thir appetite with gust, instead of Fruit
Chewd bitter Ashes, which th’ offended taste
VVith spattering noise rejected: oft they assayd,
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft,
VVith hatefullest disrelish writh’d thir jaws
VVith foot and cinders fill’d; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumph’d once lapst.  Thus were they plagu’d
And worn with Famin, long and ceasless hiss,
Till thir lost shape, permitted, they resum’d,
Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain number’d days,
To dash thir pride, and joy for Man seduc’t.
However some tradition they dispers’d
Among the Heathen of thir purchase got,
And Fabl’d how the Serpent, whom they calld
_Ophion_ with _Eurynome_, the wide-
Encroaching _Eve_ perhaps, had first the rule
Of high _Olympus_, thence by _Saturn_ driv’n
And _Ops_, ere yet _Dictaean_ _Jove_ was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arriv’d, _Sin_ there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her _Death_
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horse: to whom _Sin_ thus began.

Second of _Satan_ sprung, all conquering Death,
What thinkst thou of our Empire now, though earnd
With travail difficult, not better farr
Then stil at Hels dark threshold to have sate watch,
Unnam’d, undreaded, and thy self half starv’d?

Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answerd soon.
To mee, who with eternal Famin pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravin I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps.

To whom th’ incestuous Mother thus repli’d.
Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, & Flours
Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Fowle,
No homely morsels, and whatever thing
The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unspar’d,
Till I in Man residing through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.

This said, they both betook them several wayes,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which th’ Almightie seeing,
From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice.

See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havoc yonder VVorld, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wastful Furies, who impute
Folly to mee, so doth the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heav’nly, and conniving seem
To gratifie my scornful Enemies,
That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of Passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yeilded up to their misrule;
And know not that I call’d and drew them thither
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure, till cramm’d and gorg’d, nigh burst
With suckt and glutted offal, at one fling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both _Sin_, and _Death_, and yawning _Grave_ at last
Through _Chaos_ hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jawes.
Then Heav’n and Earth renewd shall be made pure
To sanctitie that shall receive no staine:
Till then the Curse pronounc’t on both precedes.

Hee ended, and the heav’nly Audience loud
Sung _Halleluia_, as the sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee?  Next, to the Son,
Destin’d restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heav’n and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heav’n descend.  Such was thir song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mightie Angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The Sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc Moone
Her office they prescrib’d, to th’ other five
Thir planetarie motions and aspects
In _Sextile_, _Square_, and _Trine_, and _Opposite_,
Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt
Thir influence malignant when to showre,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set
Thir corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle
With terror through the dark Aereal Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turne ascanse
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour push’d
Oblique the Centric Globe: Som say the Sun
Was bid turn Reines from th’ Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to _Taurus_ with the Seav’n
_Atlantick_ Sisters, and the _Spartan_ Twins
Up to the _Tropic_ Crab; thence down amaine
By _Leo_ and the _Virgin_ and the _Scales_,
As deep as _Capricorne_, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring
Perpetual smil’d on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun
To recompence his distance, in thir sight
Had rounded still th’ _Horizon_, and not known
Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow
From cold _Estotiland_, and South as farr
Beneath _Magellan_.  At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from _Thyestean_ Banquet, turn’d
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sinless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate?
These changes in the Heav’ns, though slow, produc’d
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,
Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North
Of _Norumbega_, and the _Samoed_ shoar
Bursting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice
And snow and haile and stormie gust and flaw,
_Boreas_ and _Caecias_ and _Argestes_ loud
And _Thrascias_ rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast up-turns them from the South
_Notus_ and _Afer_ black with thundrous Clouds
From _Serraliona_; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the _Levant_ and the _Ponent_ VVindes
_Eurus_ and _Zephir_ with thir lateral noise,
_Sirocco_, and _Libecchio_. Thus began
Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th’ irrational,
Death introduc’d through fierce antipathie:
Beast now with Beast gan war, & Fowle with Fowle,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with count’nance grim
Glar’d on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which _Adam_ saw
Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within,
And in a troubl’d Sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburd’n sought with sad complaint.

O miserable of happie! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and mee so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now becom
Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The miserie, I deserv’d it, and would beare
My own deservings; but this will not serve;
All that I eate or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice once heard
Delightfully, _Encrease and Multiply_,
Now death to heare! for what can I encrease
Or multiplie, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank _Adam_; but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee
Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound,
On mee as on thir natural center light
Heavie, though in thir place.  O fleeting joyes
Of Paradise, deare bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I sollicite thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurd not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resigne, and render back
All I receav’d, unable to performe
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refusd
Those terms whatever, when they were propos’d:
Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reprov’d, retort,
Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not:
Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust returne:
O welcom hour whenever! why delayes
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mockt with death, and length’nd out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortalitie my sentence, and be Earth
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To mee and to my ofspring would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspir’d, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place, who knows
But I shall die a living Death?  O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinn’d; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Bodie properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so,
But mortal doom’d.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument
Of weakness, not of Power.  Will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punisht man, to satisfie his rigour
Satisfi’d never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of thir matter act,
Not to th’ extent of thir own Spheare.  But say
That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos’d,
Bereaving sense, but endless miserie
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution
On my defensless head; both Death and I
Am found Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part single, in mee all
Posteritie stands curst: Fair Patrimonie
That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your Curse!  Ah, why should all mankind
For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemn’d,
If guiltless?  But from mee what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav’d,
Not to do onely, but to will the same
With me? how can they acquitted stand
In sight of God?  Him after all Disputes
Forc’t I absolve: all my evasions vain
And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On mee, mee onely, as the sourse and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrauth, Fond wish! couldst thou support
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear,
Then all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman?  Thus what thou desir’st,
And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To _Satan_ onely like both crime and doom.
O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
And horrors hast thou driv’n me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plung’d!

Thus _Adam_ to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, now now, as ere man fell,
Wholsom and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conscience represented
All things with double terror: On the ground
Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Curs’d his Creation, Death as oft accus’d
Of tardie execution, since denounc’t
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said hee, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me?  Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hast’n to be just?
But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs,
VVith other echo farr I taught your Shades
To answer, and resound farr other Song.
VVhom thus afflicted when sad _Eve_ beheld,
Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assay’d:
But her with stern regard he thus repell’d.

Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagu’d, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour Serpentine may shew
Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heav’nly form, pretended
To hellish falshood, snare them.  But for thee
I had persisted happie, had not thy pride
And wandring vanitie, when lest was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdain’d
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
Though by the Devil himself, him overweening
To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting
Fool’d and beguil’d, by him thou, I by thee,
To trust thee from my side, imagin’d wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
And understood not all was but a shew
Rather then solid vertu, all but a Rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie
To my just number found.  O why did God,
Creator wise, that peopl’d highest Heav’n
With Spirits Masculine, create at last
This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
With Men as Angels without Feminine,
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? this mischief had not then befall’n,
And more that shall befall, innumerable
Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares,
And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either
He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gaind
By a farr worse, or if she love, withheld
By Parents, or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound
To a fell Adversarie, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamitie shall cause
To humane life, and houshold peace confound.

He added not, and from her turn’d, but _Eve_
Not so repulst, with Tears that ceas’d not flowing,
And tresses all disorderd, at his feet
Fell humble, and imbracing them, besaught
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.

Forsake me not thus, _Adam_, witness Heav’n
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I beare thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappilie deceav’d; thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
My onely strength and stay: forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joyning,
As joyn’d in injuries, one enmitie
Against a Foe by doom express assign’d us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this miserie befall’n,
On me already lost, mee then thy self
More miserable; both have sin’d, but thou
Against God onely, I against God and thee,
And to the place of judgement will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The sentence from thy head remov’d may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,
Mee mee onely just object of his ire.

She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight,
Immoveable till peace obtain’d from fault
Acknowledg’d and deplor’d, in _Adam_ wraught
Commiseration; soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress,
Creature so faire his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel whom she had displeas’d, his aide;
As one disarm’d, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words uprais’d her soon.

Unwarie, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowst not, who desir’st
The punishment all on thy self; alas,
Beare thine own first, ill able to sustaine
His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part,
And my displeasure bearst so ill.  If Prayers
Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited,
Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv’n,
To me committed and by me expos’d.
But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blam’d enough elsewhere, but strive
In offices of Love, how we may light’n
Each others burden in our share of woe;
Since this days Death denounc’t, if ought I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac’t evill,
A long days dying to augment our paine,
And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) deriv’d.

To whom thus _Eve_, recovering heart, repli’d.
_Adam_, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can finde,
Found so erroneous, thence by just event
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,
Restor’d by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine
Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart,
Living or dying from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris’n,
Tending to som relief of our extremes,
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devourd
By Death at last, and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring
Into this cursed World a woful Race,
That after wretched Life must be at last
Food for so foule a Monster, in thy power
It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent
The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, Childless remaine:
So Death shall be deceav’d his glut, and with us two
Be forc’d to satisfie his Rav’nous Maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet,
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire, which would be miserie
And torment less then none of what we dread,
Then both our selves and Seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,
Let us seek Death, or hee not found, supply
With our own hands his Office on our selves;
Why stand we longer shivering under feares,
That shew no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many wayes to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy.

She ended heer, or vehement despaire
Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts
Had entertaind, as di’d her Cheeks with pale.
But _Adam_ with such counsel nothing sway’d,
To better hopes his more attentive minde
Labouring had rais’d, and thus to _Eve_ repli’d.

_Eve_, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee somthing more sublime
And excellent then what thy minde contemnes;
But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overlov’d.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of miserie, so thinking to evade
The penaltie pronounc’t, doubt not but God
Hath wiselier arm’d his vengeful ire then so
To be forestall’d; much more I fear least Death
So snatcht will not exempt us from the paine
We are by doom to pay; rather such acts
Of contumacie will provoke the highest
To make death in us live: Then let us seek
Som safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to minde with heed
Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise
The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe
_Satan_, who in the Serpent hath contriv’d
Against us this deceit: to crush his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
By death brought on our selves, or childless days
Resolv’d, as thou proposest; so our Foe
Shall scape his punishment ordain’d, and wee
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mention’d then of violence
Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope, and savours onely
Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our Necks.  Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judg’d
Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, soon recompenc’t with joy,
Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curse aslope
Glanc’d on the ground, with labour I must earne
My bread; what harm?  Idleness had bin worse;
My labour will sustain me; and least Cold
Or Heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands
Cloath’d us unworthie, pitying while he judg’d;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pitie incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
Th’ inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,
Which now the Skie with various Face begins
To shew us in this Mountain, while the Winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek
Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish
Our Limbs benumm’d, ere this diurnal Starr
Leave cold the Night, how we his gather’d beams
Reflected, may with matter sere foment,
Or by collision of two bodies grinde
The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds
Justling or pusht with Winds rude in thir shock
Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driv’n down
Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine,
And sends a comfortable heat from farr,
Which might supplie the Sun: such Fire to use,
And what may else be remedie or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
Hee will instruct us praying, and of Grace
Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustain’d
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judg’d us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
VVatering the ground, and with our sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
VVhen angry most he seem’d and most severe,
VVhat else but favor, grace, and mercie shon?

So spake our Father penitent, nor _Eve_
Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judg’d them prostrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confess’d
Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg’d, with tears
VVatering the ground, and with thir sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign’d, and humiliation meek.

       THE END OF THE NINTH BOOK.

  PARADISE LOST.





  BOOK X.

Thus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had remov’d
The stonie from thir hearts, and made new flesh
Regenerat grow instead, that sighs now breath’d
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspir’d, and wing’d for Heav’n with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratorie: yet thir port
Not of mean suiters, nor important less
Seem’d thir Petition, then when th’ ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,
_Deucalion_ and chaste _Pyrrha_ to restore
The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine
Of _Themis_ stood devout.  To Heav’n thir prayers
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious windes
Blow’n vagabond or frustrate: in they passd
Dimentionless through Heav’nly dores; then clad
With incense, where the Golden Altar fum’d,
By thir great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.

See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixt
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sow’n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produc’t, ere fall’n
From innocence.  Now therefore bend thine eare
To supplication, heare his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee
Interpret for him, mee his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on mee
Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those
Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in mee from these receave
The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live
Before thee reconcil’d, at least his days
Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee
All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.

To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to aire as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowd, with Happiness
And Immortalitie: that fondly lost,
This other serv’d but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedie, and after Life
Tri’d in sharp tribulation, and refin’d
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Wak’t in the renovation of the just,
Resignes him up with Heav’n and Earth renewd.
But let us call to Synod all the Blest
Through Heav’ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd.

He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew
His Trumpet, heard in _Oreb_ since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom.  Th’ Angelic blast
Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs
Of _Amarantin_ Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,
And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream
Th’ Almighty thus pronounced his sovran Will.

O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had it suffic’d him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left.  Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
Forever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile.

_Michael_, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession som new trouble raise:
Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowd ground th’ unholie, and denounce
To them and to thir Progenie from thence
Perpetual banishment.  Yet least they faint
At the sad Sentence rigorously urg’d,
For I behold them soft’nd and with tears
Bewailing thir excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale
To _Adam_ what shall come in future dayes,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Cov’nant in the Womans seed renewd;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from _Eden_ easiest climbes,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey,
With whose stol’n Fruit Man once more to delude.

He ceas’d; and th’ Archangelic Power prepar’d
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double _Janus_, all thir shape
Spangl’d with eyes more numerous then those
Of _Argus_, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charm’d with _Arcadian_ Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of _Hermes_, or his opiate Rod.  Meanwhile
To resalute the World with sacred Light
_Leucothea_ wak’d, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when _Adam_ and first Matron _Eve_
Had ended now thir Orisons, and found,
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt;
Which thus to _Eve_ his welcome words renewd.

_Eve_, easily may Faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from Heav’n descends
But that from us ought should ascend to Heav’n
So prevalent as to concerne the mind
Of God high blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Ev’n to the Seat of God.  For since I saught
By Prayer th’ offended Deitie to appease,
Kneel’d and before him humbl’d all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returnd
Home to my brest, and to my memorie
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence Haile to thee,
_Eve_ rightly call’d, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.

To whom thus _Eve_ with sad demeanour meek.
Ill worthie I such title should belong
To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind
A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am grac’t
The sourse of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf’t,
Farr other name deserving.  But the Field
To labour calls us now with sweat impos’d,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcern’d with our unrest, begins
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes?
Here let us live, though in fall’n state, content.

So spake, so wish’d much-humbl’d _Eve_, but Fate
Subscrib’d not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest
On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips’d
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of _Jove_, stoopt from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,
First Hunter then, pursu’d a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the Forrest, Hart and Hinde;
Direct to th’ Eastern Gate was bent thir flight.
_Adam_ observ’d, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmov’d to _Eve_ thus spake.

O _Eve_, some furder change awaits us nigh,
Which Heav’n by these mute signs in Nature shews
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us haply too secure of our discharge
From penaltie, because from death releast
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
VVhy else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursu’d in th’ Air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Dayes mid-course, and Morning light
More orient in yon VVestern Cloud that draws
O’re the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with somthing heav’nly fraught.

He err’d not, for by this the heav’nly Bands
Down from a Skie of Jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimm’d _Adams_ eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
_Jacob_ in _Mahanaim_, where he saw
The field Pavilion’d with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd
In _Dothan_, cover’d with a Camp of Fire,
Against the _Syrian_ King, who to surprize
One man, Assassin-like had levied Warr,
Warr unproclam’d.  The Princely Hierarch
In thir bright stand, there left his Powers to seise
Possession of the Garden; hee alone,
To finde where _Adam_ shelterd, took his way,
Not unperceav’d of _Adam_, who to _Eve_,
While the great Visitant approachd, thus spake.

_Eve_, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determin, or impose
New Laws to be observ’d; for I descrie
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heav’nly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majestie
Invests him coming; yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As _Raphael_, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and th’ Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Armes
A militarie Vest of purple flowd
Livelier then _Meliboean_, or the graine
Of _Sarra_, worn by Kings and Hero’s old
In time of Truce; _Iris_ had dipt the wooff;
His starrie Helme unbuckl’d shew’d him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistering _Zodiac_ hung the Sword,
Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.
_Adam_ bowd low, hee Kingly from his State
Inclin’d not, but his coming thus declar’d.

_Adam_, Heav’ns high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated of his seisure many dayes
Giv’n thee of Grace, wherein thou may’st repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas’d
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claimes;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast tak’n, fitter Soile.

He added not, for _Adam_ at the newes
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; _Eve_, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discover’d soon the place of her retire.

O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee Native Soile, these happie Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respit of that day
That must be mortal to us both.  O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At Eev’n, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first op’ning bud, and gave ye Names,
Who now shall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke
Your Tribes, and water from th’ ambrosial Fount?
Thee lastly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to this obscure
And wilde, how shall we breath in other Aire
Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits?

Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde.
Lament not _Eve_, but patiently resigne
What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soile.

_Adam_ by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd,
To _Michael_ thus his humble words addressd.

Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or nam’d
Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem
Prince above Princes, gently hast thou tould
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailtie can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and onely consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appeer and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not cease
To wearie him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute Decree
No more availes then breath against the winde,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd
His blessed count’nance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he voutsaf’d
Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree
Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk’d:
So many grateful Altars I would reare
Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memorie,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling Gumms & Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or footstep trace?
For though I fled him angrie, yet recall’d
To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory, and farr off his steps adore.

To whom thus _Michael_ with regard benigne.
_Adam_, thou know’st Heav’n his, and all the Earth
Not this Rock onely; his Omnipresence fills
Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All th’ Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confin’d
Of Paradise or _Eden_: this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Seate, from whence had spred
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of th’ Earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee thir great Progenitor.
But this praeeminence thou hast lost, brought down
To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in Plaine
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a signe
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal Love, his Face
Express, and of his steps the track Divine.
Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd,
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To shew thee what shall come in future dayes
To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending
With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally enur’d
By moderation either state to beare,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepar’d endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes.  Ascend
This Hill; let _Eve_ (for I have drencht her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak’st,
As once thou slepst, while Shee to life was formd.

To whom thus _Adam_ gratefully repli’d.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path
Thou lead’st me, and to the hand of Heav’n submit,
However chast’ning, to the evil turne
My obvious breast, arming to overcom
By suffering, and earne rest from labour won,
If so I may attain.  So both ascend
In the Visions of God:  It was a Hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken
Stretcht out to amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the Tempter set
Our second _Adam_ in the Wilderness,
To shew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls
Of _Cambalu_, seat of _Cathaian Can_
And _Samarchand_ by _Oxus_, _Temirs_ Throne,
To _Paquin_ of _Sinaean_ Kings, and thence
To _Agra_ and _Lahor_ of great _Mogul_
Down to the golden _Chersones_, or where
The _Persian_ in _Ecbatan_ sate, or since
In _Hispahan_, or where the _Russian Ksar_
In _Mosco_, or the Sultan in _Bizance_,
_Turchestan_-born; nor could his eye not ken
Th’ Empire of _Negus_ to his utmost Port
_Ercoco_ and the less Maritine Kings
_Mombaza_, and _Quiloa_, and _Melind_,
And _Sofala_ thought _Ophir_, to the Realme
Of _Congo_, and _Angola_ fardest South;
Or thence from _Niger_ Flood to _Atlas_ Mount
The Kingdoms of _Almansor_, _Fez_, and _Sus_,
_Marocco_ and _Algiers_, and _Tremisen_;
On _Europe_ thence, and where _Rome_ was to sway
The VVorld: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich _Mexico_ the seat of _Motezume_,
And _Cusco_ in _Peru_, the richer seat
Of _Atabalipa_, and yet unspoil’d
_Guiana_, whose great Citie _Geryons_ Sons
Call _El Dorado:_ but to nobler sights
_Michael_ from _Adams_ eyes the Filme remov’d
VVhich that false Fruit that promis’d clearer sight
Had bred; then purg’d with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the VVell of Life three drops instill’d.
So deep the power of these Ingredients pierc’d,
Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That _Adam_ now enforc’t to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst:
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon rais’d, and his attention thus recall’d.

_Adam_, now ope thine eyes, and first behold
Th’ effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touch’d
Th’ excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspir’d,
Nor sinn’d thy sin, yet from that sin derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.

His eyes he op’nd, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reapt, the other part sheep-walks and foulds;
Ith’ midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood
Rustic, of grassie sord; thither anon
A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought
First Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncull’d, as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incense strew’d,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform’d.
His Offring soon propitious Fire from Heav’n
Consum’d with nimble glance, and grateful steame;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat hee inlie rag’d, and as they talk’d,
Smote him into the Midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groand out his Soul with gushing bloud effus’d.
Much at that sight was _Adam_ in his heart
Dismai’d, and thus in haste to th’ Angel cri’d.

O Teacher, some great mischief hath befall’n
To that meek man, who well had sacrific’d;
Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid?

T’ whom _Michael_ thus, hee also mov’d, repli’d.
These two are Brethren, _Adam_, and to come
Out of thy loyns; th’ unjust the just hath slain,
For envie that his Brothers Offering found
From Heav’n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact
Will be aveng’d, and th’ others Faith approv’d
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rowling in dust and gore.  To which our Sire.

Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death?  Is this the way
I must return to native dust?  O sight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!

To whom thus _Michael_.  Death thou hast seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at th’ entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw’st, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shal bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know
What miserie th’ inabstinence of _Eve_
Shall bring on men.  Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark,
A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseas’d, all maladies
Of gastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes
Of heart-sick Agonie, all feavorous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Dropsies, and Asthma’s, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invok’t
With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey’d behold?  _Adam_ could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compassion quell’d
His best of Man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renew’d.

O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserv’d?
Better end heer unborn.  Why is life giv’n
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offer’d, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismist in peace.  Can thus
Th’ Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faultie since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas’t
Under inhuman pains?  Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?

Thir Makers Image, answerd _Michael_, then
Forsook them, when themselves they villifi’d
To serve ungovern’d appetite, and took
His Image whom they serv’d, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of _Eve_.
Therefore so abject is thir punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but thir own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defac’t
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsom sickness, worthily, since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.

I yeild it just, said _Adam_, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural dust?

There is, said _Michael_, if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So maist thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To witherd weak & gray; thy Senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgoe,
To what thou hast, and for the Aire of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne
A melancholly damp of cold and dry
To waigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The Balme of Life.  To whom our Ancestor.

Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendring up.  _Michael_ to him repli’d.

Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst
Live well, how long or short permit to Heav’n:
And now prepare thee for another sight.

He lookd and saw a spacious Plaine, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd
Thir stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursu’d transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge
Labouring, two massie clods of Iron and Brass
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To som Caves mouth, or whether washt by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepar’d; from which he formd
First his own Tooles; then, what might else be wrought
Fulfil or grav’n in mettle.  After these,
But on the hether side a different sort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by thir guise
Just men they seemd, and all thir study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things lost which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold
A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay
In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, ey’d them, and let thir eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they lik’d, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till th’ Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok’t;
With Feast and Musick all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love & youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attach’d the heart
Of _Adam_, soon enclin’d to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus express’d.

True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
Of peaceful dayes portends, then those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends.

To whom thus _Michael_.  Judg not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holie and pure, conformitie divine.
Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appere
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare,
Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg’d none.
Yet they a beauteous ofspring shall beget;
For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred onely and completed to the taste
Of lustful apperence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roule the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl’d them the Sons of God,
Shall yeild up all thir vertue, all thir fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at larg) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weepe.

To whom thus _Adam_ of short joy bereft.
O pittie and shame, that they who to live well
Enterd so faire, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.

From Mans effeminate slackness it begins,
Said th’ Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdome, and superiour gifts receavd.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.

He lookd and saw wide Territorie spred
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs,
Concours in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr,
Giants of mightie Bone, and bould emprise;
Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battel rang’d
Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood;
One way a Band select from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine
From a fat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine,
Thir Bootie; scarce with Life the Shepherds flye,
But call in aide, which tacks a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine;
Where Cattel pastur’d late, now scatterd lies
With Carcasses and Arms th’ ensanguind Field
Deserted: Others to a Citie strong
Lay Siege, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the Wall defend
With Dart and Jav’lin, Stones and sulfurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the scepter’d Haralds call
To Council in the Citie Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgement from above: him old and young
Exploded, and had seiz’d with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatch’d him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.
_Adam_ was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turnd full sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heav’n
Rescu’d, had in his Righteousness bin lost?

To whom thus _Michael_; These are the product
Of those ill-mated Marriages thou saw’st;
Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves
Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt,
Produce prodigious Births of bodie or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those dayes Might onely shall be admir’d,
And Valour and Heroic Vertu call’d;
To overcome in Battel, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done
Of triumph, to be styl’d great Conquerours,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier call’d and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be achiev’d, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The onely righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to shew thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment;
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.

He look’d, & saw the face of things quite chang’d;
The brazen Throat of Warr had ceast to roar,
All now was turn’d to jollitie and game,
To luxurie and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adulterie, where passing faire
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles.
At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of thir doings great dislike declar’d,
And testifi’d against thir wayes; hee oft
Frequented thir Assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preachd
Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls
In prison under Judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas’d
Contending, and remov’d his Tents farr off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,
Measur’d by Cubit, length, & breadth, and highth,
Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a dore
Contriv’d, and of provisions laid in large
For Man and Beast: when loe a wonder strange!
Of everie Beast, and Bird, and Insect small
Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught
Thir order; last the Sire, and his three Sons
With thir four Wives, and God made fast the dore.
Meanwhile the Southwind rose, & with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heav’n; the Hills to their supplie
Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thick’nd Skie
Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rush’d the Rain
Impetuous, and continu’d till the Earth
No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o’re the Waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp
Deep under water rould; Sea cover’d Sea,
Sea without shoar; and in thir Palaces
Where luxurie late reign’d, Sea-monsters whelp’d
And stabl’d; of Mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbark’t.
How didst thou grieve then, _Adam_, to behold
The end of all thy Ofspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another Floud,
Of tears and sorrow a Floud thee also drown’d,
And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard
By th’ Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His Childern, all in view destroyd at once;
And scarce to th’ Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.

O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
Liv’d ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil onely, each dayes lot
Anough to bear; those now, that were dispenst
The burd’n of many Ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere thir being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And hee the future evil shall no less
In apprehension then in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warne: those few escap’t
Famin and anguish will at last consume
Wandring that watrie Desert: I had hope
When violence was ceas’t, and Warr on Earth,
All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd
With length of happy days the race of man;
But I was farr deceav’d; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less then Warr to waste.
How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.
To whom thus _Michael_.  Those whom last thou sawst
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true vertu void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change thir course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace.
The conquerd also, and enslav’d by Warr
Shall with thir freedom lost all vertu loose
And feare of God, from whom thir pietie feign’d
In sharp contest of Battel found no aide
Against invaders; therefore coold in zeale
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldlie or dissolute, on what thir Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for th’ Earth shall bear
More then anough, that temperance may be tri’d:
So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav’d,
Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the onely Son of light
In a dark Age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a World
Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, hee of thir wicked wayes
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come
On thir impenitence; and shall returne
Of them derided, but of God observd
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself and houshold from amidst
A World devote to universal rack.
No sooner hee with them of Man and Beast
Select for life shall in the Ark be lodg’d,
And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heav’n set open on the Earth shall powre
Raine day and night, all fountaines of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd
Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud,
With all his verdure spoil’d, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the op’ning Gulf,
And there take root an Iland salt and bare,
The haunt of Seales and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctitie, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.

He lookd, and saw the Ark hull on the floud,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie
Wrinkl’d the face of Deluge, as decai’d;
And the cleer Sun on his wide watrie Glass
Gaz’d hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made thir flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebbe, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt
His Sluces, as the Heav’n his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer;
With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde.
Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and agen to spie
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leafe he brings, pacific signe:
Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heav’n, over his head beholds
A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three lifted colours gay,
Betok’ning peace from God, and Cov’nant new.
Whereat the heart of _Adam_ erst so sad
Greatly rejoyc’d, and thus his joy broke forth.

O thou that future things canst represent
As present, Heav’nly instructer, I revive
At this last sight, assur’d that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and thir seed preserve.
Farr less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyd, then I rejoyce
For one Man found so perfet and so just,
That God voutsafes to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heavn,
Distended as the Brow of God appeas’d,
Or serve they as a flourie verge to binde
The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud,
Least it again dissolve and showr the Earth?

To whom th’ Archangel.  Dextrously thou aim’st;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Man deprav’d,
Griev’d at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth fill’d with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each thir way; yet those remoov’d,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-colour’d Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Cov’nant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold thir course, till fire purge all things new,
Both Heav’n and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
Thus thou hast seen one World begin and end;
And Man as from a second stock proceed.
Much thou hast yet to see, but I perceave
Thy mortal sight to faile; objects divine
Must needs impaire and wearie human sense:
Henceforth what is to com I will relate,
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second sours of Men, while yet but few,
And while the dread of judgement past remains
Fresh in thir mindes, fearing the Deitie,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead thir lives, and multiplie apace,
Labouring the soile, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn wine and oyle; and from the herd or flock,
Oft sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,
With large Wine-offerings pour’d, and sacred Feast
Shal spend thir dayes in joy unblam’d, and dwell
Long time in peace by Families and Tribes
Under paternal rule; till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who not content
With fair equalitie, fraternal state,
Will arrogate Dominion undeserv’d
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of Nature from the Earth;
Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)
With Warr and hostile snare such as refuse
Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:
A mightie Hunter thence he shall be styl’d
Before the Lord, as in despite of Heav’n,
Or from Heav’n claming second Sovrantie;
And from Rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of Rebellion others he accuse.
Hee with a crew, whom like Ambition joyns
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from _Eden_ towards the West, shall finde
The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;
Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build
A Citie & Towre, whose top may reach to Heav’n;
And get themselves a name, least far disperst
In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost,
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God who oft descends to visit men
Unseen, and through thir habitations walks
To mark thir doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see thir Citie, ere the Tower
Obstruct Heav’n Towrs, and in derision sets
Upon thir Tongues a various Spirit to rase
Quite out thir Native Language, and instead
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud
Among the Builders; each to other calls
Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mockt they storm; great laughter was in Heav’n
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange
And hear the din; thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion nam’d.

Whereto thus _Adam_ fatherly displeas’d.
O execrable Son so to aspire
Above his Brethren, to himself affirming
Authoritie usurpt, from God not giv’n:
He gave us onely over Beast, Fish, Fowl
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but Man over men
He made not Lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this Usurper his encroachment proud
Stayes not on Man; to God his Tower intends
Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
Will he convey up thither to sustain
Himself and his rash Armie, where thin Aire
Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?

To whom thus _Michael_.  Justly thou abhorr’st
That Son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational Libertie; yet know withall,
Since thy original lapse, true Libertie
Is lost, which alwayes with right Reason dwells
Twinn’d, and from her hath no dividual being:
Reason in man obscur’d, or not obeyd,
Immediately inordinate desires
And upstart Passions catch the Government
From Reason, and to servitude reduce
Man till then free.  Therefore since hee permits
Within himself unworthie Powers to reign
Over free Reason, God in Judgement just
Subjects him from without to violent Lords;
Who oft as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom: Tyrannie must be,
Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet somtimes Nations will decline so low
From vertue, which is reason, that no wrong,
But Justice, and some fatal curse annext
Deprives them of thir outward libertie,
Thir inward lost: Witness th’ irreverent Son
Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame
Don to his Father, heard this heavie curse,
_Servant of Servants_, on his vitious Race.
Thus will this latter, as the former World,
Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to thir own polluted wayes;
And one peculiar Nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invok’d,
A Nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side _Euphrates_ yet residing,
Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men
(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,
While yet the Patriark liv’d, who scap’d the Flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To-worship thir own work in Wood and Stone
For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes
To call by Vision from his Fathers house,
His kindred and false Gods, into a Land
Which he will shew him, and from him will raise
A mightie Nation, and upon him showre
His benediction so, that in his Seed
All Nations shall be blest; hee straight obeys,
Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou canst not, with what Faith
He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soile
_Ur_ of _Chaldaea_, passing now the Ford
To _Haran_, after him a cumbrous Train
Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude;
Not wandring poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who call’d him, in a land unknown.
_Canaan_ he now attains, I see his Tents
Pitcht about _Sechem_, and the neighbouring Plaine
Of _Moreb_ there by promise he receaves
Gift to his Progenie of all that Land;
From _Hamath_ Northward to the Desert South
(Things by thir names I call, though yet unnam’d)
From _Hermon_ East to the great Western Sea,
Mount _Hermon_, yonder Sea, each place behold
In prospect, as I point them; on the shoare
Mount _Carmel_; here the double-founted stream
_Jordan_, true limit Eastward; but his Sons
Shall dwell to _Senir_, that long ridge of Hills.
This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth
Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed
Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be reveald.  This Patriarch blest,
Whom _Faithful Abraham_ due time shall call,
A Son, and of his Son a Grand-childe leaves,
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown;
The Grandchilde with twelve Sons increast, departs
From _Canaan_, to a Land hereafter call’d
_Egypt_, divided by the River _Nile_;
See where it flows, disgorging at seaven mouthes
Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land
He comes invited by a yonger Son
In time of dearth, a Son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that Realme
Of _Pharao_: there he dies, and leaves his Race
Growing into a Nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent King, who seeks
To stop thir overgrowth, as inmate guests
Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills thir infant Males:
Till by two brethren (those two brethren call
_Moses_ and _Aaron_) sent from God to claime
His people from enthralment, they return
With glory and spoile back to thir promis’d Land.
But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies
To know thir God, or message to regard,
Must be compelld by Signes and Judgements dire;
To blood unshed the Rivers must be turnd,
Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill
With loath’d intrusion, and fill all the land;
His Cattel must of Rot and Murren die,
Botches and blaines must all his flesh imboss,
And all his people; Thunder mixt with Haile,
Haile mixt with fire must rend th’ _Egyptian_ Skie
And wheel on th’ Earth, devouring where it rouls;
What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Graine,
A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green:
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkness, and blot out three dayes;
Last with one midnight stroke all the first-born
Of _Egypt_ must lie dead.  Thus with ten wounds
This River-dragon tam’d at length submits
To let his sojourners depart, and oft
Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice
More hard’nd after thaw, till in his rage
Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea
Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass
As on drie land between two christal walls,
Aw’d by the rod of _Moses_ so to stand
Divided, till his rescu’d gain thir shoar:
Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend,
Though present in his Angel, who shall goe
Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire,
To guide them in thir journey, and remove
Behinde them, while th’ obdurat King pursues:
All night he will pursue, but his approach
Darkness defends between till morning Watch;
Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud
God looking forth will trouble all his Host
And craze thir Chariot wheels: when by command
_Moses_ once more his potent Rod extends
Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys;
On thir imbattelld ranks the Waves return,
And overwhelm thir Warr: the Race elect
Safe towards _Canaan_ from the shoar advance
Through the wilde Desert, not the readiest way,
Least entring on the _Canaanite_ allarmd
Warr terrifie them inexpert, and feare
Return them back to _Egypt_, choosing rather
Inglorious life with servitude; for life
To noble and ignoble is more sweet
Untraind in Armes, where rashness leads not on.
This also shall they gain by thir delay
In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found
Thir government, and thir great Senate choose
Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind:
God from the Mount of _Sinai_, whose gray top
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself
In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound
Ordaine them Lawes; part such as appertaine
To civil Justice, part religious Rites
Of sacrifice, informing them, by types
And shadowes, of that destind Seed to bruise
The Serpent, by what meanes he shall achieve
Mankinds deliverance.  But the voice of God
To mortal eare is dreadful; they beseech
That _Moses_ might report to them his will,
And terror cease; he grants them thir desire,
Instructed that to God is no access
Without Mediator, whose high Office now
_Moses_ in figure beares, to introduce
One greater, of whose day he shall foretell,
And all the Prophets in thir Age the times
Of great _Messiah_ shall sing.  Thus Laws and Rites
Establisht, such delight hath God in Men
Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes
Among them to set up his Tabernacle,
The holy One with mortal Men to dwell:
By his prescript a Sanctuary is fram’d
Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein
An Ark, and in the Ark his Testimony,
The Records of his Cov’nant, over these
A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings
Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn
Seaven Lamps as in a Zodiac representing
The Heav’nly fires; over the Tent a Cloud
Shall rest by Day, a fierie gleame by Night,
Save when they journie, and at length they come,
Conducted by his Angel to the Land
Promisd to _Abraham_ and his Seed: the rest
Were long to tell, how many Battels fought,
How many Kings destroyd, and Kingdoms won,
Or how the Sun shall in mid Heav’n stand still
A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne,
Mans voice commanding, Sun in _Gibeon_ stand,
And thou Moon in the vale of _Aialon_,
Till _Israel_ overcome; so call the third
From _Abraham_, Son of _Isaac_, and from him
His whole descent, who thus shall _Canaan_ win.

Here _Adam_ interpos’d.  O sent from Heav’n,
Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things
Thou hast reveald, those chiefly which concerne
Just _Abraham_ and his Seed: now first I finde
Mine eyes true op’ning, and my heart much eas’d,
Erwhile perplext with thoughts what would becom
Of mee and all Mankind; but now I see
His day, in whom all Nations shall be blest,
Favour unmerited by me, who sought
Forbidd’n knowledge by forbidd’n means.
This yet I apprehend not, why to those
Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth
So many and so various Laws are giv’n;
So many Laws argue so many sins
Among them; how can God with such reside?

To whom thus _Michael_.  Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was Law given them to evince
Thir natural pravitie, by stirring up
Sin against Law to fight; that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowie expiations weak,
The bloud of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude
Some bloud more precious must be paid for Man,
Just for unjust, that in such righteousness
To them by Faith imputed, they may finde
Justification towards God, and peace
Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies
Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part
Perform, and not performing cannot live.
So Law appears imperfet, and but giv’n
With purpose to resign them in full time
Up to a better Cov’nant, disciplin’d
From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit,
From imposition of strict Laws, to free
Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear
To filial, works of Law to works of Faith.
And therefore shall not _Moses_, though of God
Highly belov’d, being but the Minister
Of Law, his people into _Canaan_ lead;
But _Joshua_ whom the Gentiles _Jesus_ call,
His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell
The adversarie Serpent, and bring back
Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Meanwhile they in thir earthly _Canaan_ plac’t
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins
National interrupt thir public peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies:
From whom as oft he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom
The second, both for pietie renownd
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne
For ever shall endure; the like shall sing
All Prophecie, That of the Royal Stock
Of _David_ (so I name this King) shall rise
A Son, the Womans Seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to _Abraham_, as in whom shall trust
All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings
The last, for of his Reign shall be no end.
But first a long succession must ensue,
And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom fam’d,
The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents
Wandring, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registerd
Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle,
Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults
Heapt to the popular summe, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose thir Land,
Thir Citie, his Temple, and his holy Ark
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud Citie, whose high Walls thou saw’st
Left in confusion, _Babylon_ thence call’d.
There in captivitie he lets them dwell
The space of seventie years, then brings them back,
Remembring mercie, and his Cov’nant sworn
To _David_, stablisht as the dayes of Heav’n.
Returnd from _Babylon_ by leave of Kings
Thir Lords, whom God dispos’d, the house of God
They first re-edifie, and for a while
In mean estate live moderate, till grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;
But first among the Priests dissension springs,
Men who attend the Altar, and should most
Endeavour Peace: thir strife pollution brings
Upon the Temple it self: at last they seise
The Scepter, and regard not _Davids_ Sons,
Then loose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King _Messiah_ might be born
Barr’d of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr
Unseen before in Heav’n proclaims him com,
And guides the Eastern Sages, who enquire
His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold;
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells
To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night;
They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire
Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung.
A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire
The Power of the most High; he shall ascend
The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign
With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heav’ns.

He ceas’d, discerning _Adam_ with such joy
Surcharg’d, as had like grief bin dew’d in tears,
Without the vent of words, which these he breathd.

O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What oft my steddiest thoughts have searcht in vain,
Why our great expectation should be call’d
The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Haile,
High in the love of Heav’n, yet from my Loynes
Thou shalt proceed, and from thy Womb the Son
Of God most High; So God with man unites.
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
Expect with mortal paine: say where and when
Thir fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel.

To whom thus _Michael_.  Dream not of thir fight,
As of a Duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel: not therefore joynes the Son
Manhood to God-head, with more strength to foil
Thy enemie; nor so is overcome
_Satan_, whose fall from Heav’n, a deadlier bruise,
Disabl’d not to give thee thy deaths wound:
Which hee, who comes thy Saviour, shall recure,
Not by destroying _Satan_, but his works
In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou didst want,
Obedience to the Law of God, impos’d
On penaltie of death, and suffering death,
The penaltie to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So onely can high Justice rest appaid.
The Law of God exact he shall fulfill
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment
He shall endure by coming in the Flesh
To a reproachful life and cursed death,
Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe
In his redemption, and that his obedience
Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits
To save them, not thir own, though legal works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphem’d,
Seis’d on by force, judg’d, and to death condemnd
A shameful and accurst, naild to the Cross
By his own Nation, slaine for bringing Life;
But to the Cross he nailes thy Enemies,
The Law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankinde, with him there crucifi’d,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction; so he dies,
But soon revives, Death over him no power
Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light
Returne, the Starres of Morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offerd Life
Neglect not, and the benefit imbrace
By Faith not void of works: this God-like act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou shouldst have dy’d,
In sin for ever lost from life; this act
Shall bruise the head of _Satan_, crush his strength
Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine armes,
And fix farr deeper in his head thir stings
Then temporal death shall bruise the Victors heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal Life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on Earth then certaine times to appeer
To his Disciples, Men who in his Life
Still follow’d him; to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learn’d
And his Salvation, them who shall beleeve
Baptizing in the profluent streame, the signe
Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life
Pure, and in mind prepar’d, if so befall,
For death, like that which the redeemer dy’d.
All Nations they shall teach; for from that day
Not onely to the Sons of _Abrahams_ Loines
Salvation shall be Preacht, but to the Sons
Of _Abrahams_ Faith wherever through the world;
So in his seed all Nations shall be blest.
Then to the Heav’n of Heav’ns he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the aire
Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise
The Serpent, Prince of aire, and drag in Chaines
Through all his realme, & there confounded leave;
Then enter into glory, and resume
His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heav’n; and thence shall come,
When this worlds dissolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick & dead,
To judge th’ unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receave them into bliss,
Whether in Heav’n or Earth, for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Then this of _Eden_, and far happier daies.

So spake th’ Archangel _Michael_, then paus’d,
As at the Worlds great period; and our Sire
Replete with joy and wonder thus repli’d.

O goodness infinite, goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good; more wonderful
Then that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By mee done and occasiond, or rejoyce
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring,
To God more glory, more good will to Men
From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound.
But say, if our deliverer up to Heav’n
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among th’ unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth; who then shall guide
His people, who defend? will they not deale
Wors with his followers then with him they dealt?

Be sure they will, said th’ Angel; but from Heav’n
Hee to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith
Working through love, upon thir hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth, and also arme
With spiritual Armour, able to resist
_Satans_ assaults, and quench his fierie darts
What Man can do against them, not affraid,
Though to the death, against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompenc’t,
And oft supported so as shall amaze
Thir proudest persecuters: for the Spirit
Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the Nations, then on all
Baptiz’d, shall them with wondrous gifts endue
To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles,
As did thir Lord before them.  Thus they win
Great numbers of each Nation to receave
With joy the tidings brought from Heav’n: at length
Thir Ministry perform’d, and race well run,
Thir doctrine and thir story written left,
They die; but in thir room, as they forewarne,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heav’n
To thir own vile advantages shall turne
Of lucre and ambition, and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left onely in those written Records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places and titles, and with these to joine
Secular power, though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promisd alike and giv’n
To all Beleevers; and from that pretense,
Spiritual Lawes by carnal power shall force
On every conscience; Laws which none shall finde
Left them inrould, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave.  What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and binde
His consort Libertie; what, but unbuild
His living Temples, built by Faith to stand,
Thir own Faith not anothers: for on Earth
Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavie persecution shall arise
On all who in the worship persevere
Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, farr greater part,
Will deem in outward Rites and specious formes
Religion satisfi’d; Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith
Rarely be found: so shall the World goe on,
To good malignant, to bad men benigne,
Under her own waight groaning, till the day
Appeer of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promis’d to thy aid,
The Womans seed, obscurely then foretold,
Now amplier known thy Saviour and thy Lord,
Last in the Clouds from Heav’n to be reveald
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
_Satan_ with his perverted World, then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purg’d and refin’d,
New Heav’ns, new Earth, Ages of endless date
Founded in righteousness and peace and love,
To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss.

He ended; and thus _Adam_ last reply’d.
How soon hath thy prediction, Seer blest,
Measur’d this transient World, the Race of time,
Till time stand fixt: beyond is all abyss,
Eternitie, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatly instructed I shall hence depart,
Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this vessel can containe;
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learne, that to obey is best,
And love with feare the onely God, to walk
As in his presence, ever to observe
His providence, and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victorie,
And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life;
Taught this by his example whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blest.

To whom thus also th’ Angel last repli’d:
This having learnt, thou hast attaind the summe
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Starrs
Thou knewst by name, and all th’ ethereal Powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,
Or works of God in Heav’n, Air, Earth, or Sea,
And all the riches of this World enjoydst,
And all the rule, one Empire; onely add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add Faith,
Add Vertue, Patience, Temperance, add Love,
By name to come call’d Charitie, the soul
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
A Paradise within thee, happier farr.
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of Speculation; for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards,
By mee encampt on yonder Hill, expect
Thir motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword,
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round;
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;
Her also I with gentle Dreams have calm’d
Portending good, and all her spirits compos’d
To meek submission: thou at season fit
Let her with thee partake what thou hast heard,
Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know,
The great deliverance by her Seed to come
(For by the Womans Seed) on all Mankind.
That ye may live, which will be many dayes,
Both in one Faith unanimous though sad,
With cause for evils past, yet much more cheer’d
With meditation on the happie end.

He ended, and they both descend the Hill;
Descended, _Adam_ to the Bowre where _Eve_
Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak’t;
And thus with words not sad she him receav’d.

Whence thou returnst, & whither wentst, I know;
For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise,
Which he hath sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
VVearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;
In mee is no delay; with thee to goe,
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to mee
Art all things under Heav’n, all places thou,
VVho for my wilful crime art banisht hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence; though all by mee is lost,
Such favour I unworthie am voutsaft,
By mee the Promis’d Seed shall all restore.

So spake our Mother _Eve_, and _Adam_ heard
VVell pleas’d, but answer’d not; for now too nigh
Th’ Archangel stood, and from the other Hill
To thir fixt Station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended; on the ground
Gliding meteorous, as Ev’ning Mist
Ris’n from a River o’re the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the Labourers heel
Homeward returning.  High in Front advanc’t,
The brandisht Sword of God before them blaz’d
Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat,
And vapour as the _Libyan_ Air adust,
Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat
In either hand the hastning Angel caught
Our lingring Parents, and to th’ Eastern Gate
Let them direct, and down the Cliff as fast
To the subjected Plaine; then disappeer’d.
They looking back, all th’ Eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late thir happie seat,
Wav’d over by that flaming Brand, the Gate
With dreadful Faces throng’d and fierie Armes:
Som natural tears they drop’d, but wip’d them soon;
The World was all before them, where to choose
Thir place of rest, and Providence thir guide:
They hand in hand with wandring steps and slow,
Through _Eden_ took thir solitarie way.

  THE END.


PRELUDE.

Pleasant it was, when woods were green,
  And winds were soft and low,
To lie amid some sylvan scene.
Where, the long drooping boughs between,
Shadows dark and sunlight sheen
  Alternate come and go;

Or where the denser grove receives
  No sunlight from above,
But the dark foliage interweaves
In one unbroken roof of leaves,
Underneath whose sloping eaves
  The shadows hardly move.

Beneath some patriarchal tree
  I lay upon the ground;
His hoary arms uplifted he,
And all the broad leaves over me
Clapped their little hands in glee,
  With one continuous sound;--

A slumberous sound, a sound that brings
  The feelings of a dream,
As of innumerable wings,
As, when a bell no longer swings,
Faint the hollow murmur rings
  O'er meadow, lake, and stream.

And dreams of that which cannot die,
  Bright visions, came to me,
As lapped in thought I used to lie,
And gaze into the summer sky,
Where the sailing clouds went by,
  Like ships upon the sea;

Dreams that the soul of youth engage
  Ere Fancy has been quelled;
Old legends of the monkish page,
Traditions of the saint and sage,
Tales that have the rime of age,
  And chronicles of Eld.

And, loving still these quaint old themes,
  Even in the city's throng
I feel the freshness of the streams,
That, crossed by shades and sunny gleams,
Water the green land of dreams,
  The holy land of song.

Therefore, at Pentecost, which brings
  The Spring, clothed like a bride,
When nestling buds unfold their wings,
And bishop's-caps have golden rings,
Musing upon many things,
  I sought the woodlands wide.

The green trees whispered low and mild;
  It was a sound of joy!
They were my playmates when a child,
And rocked me in their arms so wild!
Still they looked at me and smiled,
  As if I were a boy;

And ever whispered, mild and low,
  "Come, be a child once more!"
And waved their long arms to and fro,
And beckoned solemnly and slow;
O, I could not choose but go
  Into the woodlands hoar,--

Into the blithe and breathing air,
  Into the solemn wood,
Solemn and silent everywhere
Nature with folded hands seemed there
Kneeling at her evening prayer!
  Like one in prayer I stood.

Before me rose an avenue
  Of tall and sombrous pines;
Abroad their fan-like branches grew,
And, where the sunshine darted through,
Spread a vapor soft and blue,
  In long and sloping lines.

And, falling on my weary brain,
  Like a fast-falling shower,
The dreams of youth came back again,
Low lispings of the summer rain,
Dropping on the ripened grain,
  As once upon the flower.

Visions of childhood!  Stay, O stay!
  Ye were so sweet and wild!
And distant voices seemed to say,
"It cannot be!  They pass away!
Other themes demand thy lay;
  Thou art no more a child!

"The land of Song within thee lies,
  Watered by living springs;
The lids of Fancy's sleepless eyes
Are gates unto that Paradise,
Holy thoughts, like stars, arise,
  Its clouds are angels' wings.

"Learn, that henceforth thy song shall be,
  Not mountains capped with snow,
Nor forests sounding like the sea,
Nor rivers flowing ceaselessly,
Where the woodlands bend to see
  The bending heavens below.

"There is a forest where the din
  Of iron branches sounds!
A mighty river roars between,
And whosoever looks therein
Sees the heavens all black with sin,
  Sees not its depths, nor bounds.

"Athwart the swinging branches cast,
  Soft rays of sunshine pour;
Then comes the fearful wintry blast
Our hopes, like withered leaves, fail fast;
Pallid lips say, 'It is past!
  We can return no more!,

"Look, then, into thine heart, and write!
  Yes, into Life's deep stream!
All forms of sorrow and delight,
All solemn Voices of the Night,
That can soothe thee, or affright,--
  Be these henceforth thy theme."



HYMN TO THE NIGHT.

[Greek quotation]

I heard the trailing garments of the Night
     Sweep through her marble halls!
I saw her sable skirts all fringed with light
     From the celestial walls!

I felt her presence, by its spell of might,
     Stoop o'er me from above;
The calm, majestic presence of the Night,
     As of the one I love.

I heard the sounds of sorrow and delight,
     The manifold, soft chimes,
That fill the haunted chambers of the Night
     Like some old poet's rhymes.

From the cool cisterns of the midnight air
     My spirit drank repose;
The fountain of perpetual peace flows there,--
     From those deep cisterns flows.

O holy Night! from thee I learn to bear
     What man has borne before!
Thou layest thy finger on the lips of Care,
     And they complain no more.

Peace!  Peace!  Orestes-like I breathe this prayer!
     Descend with broad-winged flight,
The welcome, the thrice-prayed for, the most fair,
     The best-beloved Night!



A PSALM OF LIFE.
WHAT THE HEART OF THE YOUNG MAN SAID TO THE PSALMIST.

Tell me not, in mournful numbers,
  Life is but an empty dream!
For the soul is dead that slumbers,
  And things are not what they seem.

Life is real!  Life is earnest!
  And the grave is not its goal;
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
  Was not spoken of the soul.

Not enjoyment, and not sorrow,
  Is our destined end or way;
But to act, that each to-morrow
  Find us farther than to-day.

Art is long, and Time is fleeting,
  And our hearts, though stout and brave,
Still, like muffled drums, are beating
  Funeral marches to the grave.

In the world's broad field of battle,
  In the bivouac of Life,
Be not like dumb, driven cattle!
  Be a hero in the strife!

Trust no Future, howe'er pleasant!
  Let the dead Past bury its dead!
Act,--act in the living Present!
  Heart within, and God o'erhead!

Lives of great men all remind us
  We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
  Footprints on the sands of time;--

Footprints, that perhaps another,
  Sailing o'er life's solemn main,
A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
  Seeing, shall take heart again.

Let us, then, be up and doing,
  With a heart for any fate;
Still achieving, still pursuing,
  Learn to labor and to wait.



THE REAPER AND THE FLOWERS.

There is a Reaper, whose name is Death,
  And, with his sickle keen,
He reaps the bearded grain at a breath,
  And the flowers that grow between.

"Shall I have naught that is fair?" saith he;
  "Have naught but the bearded grain?
Though the breath of these flowers is sweet to me,
  I will give them all back again."

He gazed at the flowers with tearful eyes,
  He kissed their drooping leaves;
It was for the Lord of Paradise
  He bound them in his sheaves.

"My Lord has need of these flowerets gay,"
  The Reaper said, and smiled;
"Dear tokens of the earth are they,
  Where he was once a child.

"They shall all bloom in fields of light,
  Transplanted by my care,
And saints, upon their garments white,
  These sacred blossoms wear."

And the mother gave, in tears and pain,
  The flowers she most did love;
She knew she should find them all again
  In the fields of light above.

O, not in cruelty, not in wrath,
  The Reaper came that day;
'T was an angel visited the green earth,
  And took the flowers away.



THE LIGHT OF STARS.

The night is come, but not too soon;
  And sinking silently,
All silently, the little moon
  Drops down behind the sky.

There is no light in earth or heaven
  But the cold light of stars;
And the first watch of night is given
  To the red planet Mars.

Is it the tender star of love?
  The star of love and dreams?
O no! from that blue tent above,
  A hero's armor gleams.

And earnest thoughts within me rise,
  When I behold afar,
Suspended in the evening skies,
  The shield of that red star.

O star of strength! I see thee stand
  And smile upon my pain;
Thou beckonest with thy mailed hand,
  And I am strong again.

Within my breast there is no light
  But the cold light of stars;
I give the first watch of the night
  To the red planet Mars.

The star of the unconquered will,
  He rises in my breast,
Serene, and resolute, and still,
  And calm, and self-possessed.

And thou, too, whosoe'er thou art,
  That readest this brief psalm,
As one by one thy hopes depart,
  Be resolute and calm.

O fear not in a world like this,
  And thou shalt know erelong,
Know how sublime a thing it is
  To suffer and be strong.



FOOTSTEPS OF ANGELS.

When the hours of Day are numbered,
  And the voices of the Night
Wake the better soul, that slumbered,
  To a holy, calm delight;

Ere the evening lamps are lighted,
  And, like phantoms grim and tall,
Shadows from the fitful firelight
  Dance upon the parlor wall;

Then the forms of the departed
  Enter at the open door;
The beloved, the true-hearted,
  Come to visit me once more;

He, the young and strong, who cherished
  Noble longings for the strife,
By the roadside fell and perished,
  Weary with the march of life!

They, the holy ones and weakly,
  Who the cross of suffering bore,
Folded their pale hands so meekly,
  Spake with us on earth no more!

And with them the Being Beauteous,
  Who unto my youth was given,
More than all things else to love me,
  And is now a saint in heaven.

With a slow and noiseless footstep
  Comes that messenger divine,
Takes the vacant chair beside me,
  Lays her gentle hand in mine.

And she sits and gazes at me
  With those deep and tender eyes,
Like the stars, so still and saint-like,
  Looking downward from the skies.

Uttered not, yet comprehended,
  Is the spirit's voiceless prayer,
Soft rebukes, in blessings ended,
  Breathing from her lips of air.

Oh, though oft depressed and lonely,
  All my fears are laid aside,
If I but remember only
  Such as these have lived and died!



FLOWERS.

Spake full well, in language quaint and olden,
  One who dwelleth by the castled Rhine,
When he called the flowers, so blue and golden,
  Stars, that in earth's firmament do shine.

Stars they are, wherein we read our history,
  As astrologers and seers of eld;
Yet not wrapped about with awful mystery,
  Like the burning stars, which they beheld.

Wondrous truths, and manifold as wondrous,
  God hath written in those stars above;
But not less in the bright flowerets under us
  Stands the revelation of his love.

Bright and glorious is that revelation,
  Written all over this great world of ours;
Making evident our own creation,
  In these stars of earth, these golden flowers.

And the Poet, faithful and far-seeing,
  Sees, alike in stars and flowers, a part
Of the self-same, universal being,
  Which is throbbing in his brain and heart.

Gorgeous flowerets in the sunlight shining,
  Blossoms flaunting in the eye of day,
Tremulous leaves, with soft and silver lining,
  Buds that open only to decay;

Brilliant hopes, all woven in gorgeous tissues,
  Flaunting gayly in the golden light;
Large desires, with most uncertain issues,
  Tender wishes, blossoming at night!

These in flowers and men are more than seeming;
  Workings are they of the self-same powers,
Which the Poet, in no idle dreaming,
  Seeth in himself and in the flowers.

Everywhere about us are they glowing,
  Some like stars, to tell us Spring is born;
Others, their blue eyes with tears o'er-flowing,
  Stand like Ruth amid the golden corn;

Not alone in Spring's armorial bearing,
  And in Summer's green-emblazoned field,
But in arms of brave old Autumn's wearing,
  In the centre of his brazen shield;

Not alone in meadows and green alleys,
  On the mountain-top, and by the brink
Of sequestered pools in woodland valleys,
  Where the slaves of nature stoop to drink;

Not alone in her vast dome of glory,
  Not on graves of bird and beast alone,
But in old cathedrals, high and hoary,
  On the tombs of heroes, carved in stone;

In the cottage of the rudest peasant,
  In ancestral homes, whose crumbling towers,
Speaking of the Past unto the Present,
  Tell us of the ancient Games of Flowers;

In all places, then, and in all seasons,
  Flowers expand their light and soul-like wings,
Teaching us, by most persuasive reasons,
  How akin they are to human things.

And with childlike, credulous affection
  We behold their tender buds expand;
Emblems of our own great resurrection,
  Emblems of the bright and better land.



THE BELEAGUERED CITY.

I have read, in some old, marvellous tale,
  Some legend strange and vague,
That a midnight host of spectres pale
  Beleaguered the walls of Prague.

Beside the Moldau's rushing stream,
  With the wan moon overhead,
There stood, as in an awful dream,
  The army of the dead.

White as a sea-fog, landward bound,
  The spectral camp was seen,
And, with a sorrowful, deep sound,
  The river flowed between.

No other voice nor sound was there,
  No drum, nor sentry's pace;
The mist-like banners clasped the air,
  As clouds with clouds embrace.

But when the old cathedral bell
  Proclaimed the morning prayer,
The white pavilions rose and fell
  On the alarmed air.

Down the broad valley fast and far
  The troubled army fled;
Up rose the glorious morning star,
  The ghastly host was dead.

I have read, in the marvellous heart of man,
  That strange and mystic scroll,
That an army of phantoms vast and wan
  Beleaguer the human soul.

Encamped beside Life's rushing stream,
  In Fancy's misty light,
Gigantic shapes and shadows gleam
  Portentous through the night.

Upon its midnight battle-ground
  The spectral camp is seen,
And, with a sorrowful, deep sound,
  Flows the River of Life between.

No other voice nor sound is there,
  In the army of the grave;
No other challenge breaks the air,
  But the rushing of Life's wave.

And when the solemn and deep churchbell
  Entreats the soul to pray,
The midnight phantoms feel the spell,
  The shadows sweep away.

Down the broad Vale of Tears afar
  The spectral camp is fled;
Faith shineth as a morning star,
  Our ghastly fears are dead.



MIDNIGHT MASS FOR THE DYING YEAR

Yes, the Year is growing old,
  And his eye is pale and bleared!
Death, with frosty hand and cold,
  Plucks the old man by the beard,
       Sorely, sorely!

The leaves are falling, falling,
  Solemnly and slow;
Caw! caw! the rooks are calling,
  It is a sound of woe,
       A sound of woe!

Through woods and mountain passes
  The winds, like anthems, roll;
They are chanting solemn masses,
  Singing, "Pray for this poor soul,
       Pray, pray!"

And the hooded clouds, like friars,
  Tell their beads in drops of rain,
And patter their doleful prayers;
  But their prayers are all in vain,
       All in vain!

There he stands in the foul weather,
  The foolish, fond Old Year,
Crowned with wild flowers and with heather,
    Like weak, despised Lear,
       A king, a king!

Then comes the summer-like day,
  Bids the old man rejoice!
His joy! his last!  O, the man gray
  Loveth that ever-soft voice,
       Gentle and low.

To the crimson woods he saith,
  To the voice gentle and low
Of the soft air, like a daughter's breath,
  "Pray do not mock me so!
       Do not laugh at me!"

And now the sweet day is dead;
  Cold in his arms it lies;
No stain from its breath is spread
  Over the glassy skies,
       No mist or stain!

Then, too, the Old Year dieth,
  And the forests utter a moan,
Like the voice of one who crieth
  In the wilderness alone,
       "Vex not his ghost!"

Then comes, with an awful roar,
  Gathering and sounding on,
The storm-wind from Labrador,
  The wind Euroclydon,
        The storm-wind!

Howl! howl! and from the forest
  Sweep the red leaves away!
Would, the sins that thou abhorrest,
  O Soul! could thus decay,
       And be swept away!
For there shall come a mightier blast,
  There shall be a darker day;

And the stars, from heaven down-cast
  Like red leaves be swept away!
       Kyrie, eleyson!
       Christe, eleyson!

**********

EARLIER POEMS

AN APRIL DAY

    When the warm sun, that brings
Seed-time and harvest, has returned again,
'T is sweet to visit the still wood, where springs
    The first flower of the plain.

    I love the season well,
When forest glades are teeming with bright forms,
Nor dark and many-folded clouds foretell
    The coming-on of storms.

    From the earth's loosened mould
The sapling draws its sustenance, and thrives;
Though stricken to the heart with winter's cold,
    The drooping tree revives.

    The softly-warbled song
Comes from the pleasant woods, and colored wings
Glance quick in the bright sun, that moves along
    The forest openings.

    When the bright sunset fills
The silver woods with light, the green slope throws
Its shadows in the hollows of the hills,
    And wide the upland glows.

    And when the eve is born,
In the blue lake the sky, o'er-reaching far,
Is hollowed out and the moon dips her horn,
    And twinkles many a star.

    Inverted in the tide
Stand the gray rocks, and trembling shadows throw,
And the fair trees look over, side by side,
    And see themselves below.

    Sweet April! many a thought
Is wedded unto thee, as hearts are wed;
Nor shall they fail, till, to its autumn brought,
    Life's golden fruit is shed.



AUTUMN

With what a glory comes and goes the year!
The buds of spring, those beautiful harbingers
Of sunny skies and cloudless times, enjoy
Life's newness, and earth's garniture spread out;
And when the silver habit of the clouds
Comes down upon the autumn sun, and with
A sober gladness the old year takes up
His bright inheritance of golden fruits,
A pomp and pageant fill the splendid scene.

  There is a beautiful spirit breathing now
Its mellow richness on the clustered trees,
And, from a beaker full of richest dyes,
Pouring new glory on the autumn woods,
And dipping in warm light the pillared clouds.
Morn on the mountain, like a summer bird,
Lifts up her purple wing, and in the vales
The gentle wind, a sweet and passionate wooer,
Kisses the blushing leaf, and stirs up life
Within the solemn woods of ash deep-crimsoned,
And silver beech, and maple yellow-leaved,
Where Autumn, like a faint old man, sits down
By the wayside a-weary.  Through the trees
The golden robin moves.  The purple finch,
That on wild cherry and red cedar feeds,
A winter bird, comes with its plaintive whistle,
And pecks by the witch-hazel, whilst aloud
From cottage roofs the warbling blue-bird sings,
And merrily, with oft-repeated stroke,
Sounds from the threshing-floor the busy flail.

  O what a glory doth this world put on
For him who, with a fervent heart, goes forth
Under the bright and glorious sky, and looks
On duties well performed, and days well spent!
For him the wind, ay, and the yellow leaves,
Shall have a voice, and give him eloquent teachings.
He shall so hear the solemn hymn that Death
Has lifted up for all, that he shall go
To his long resting-place without a tear.



WOODS IN WINTER.

When winter winds are piercing chill,
  And through the hawthorn blows the gale,
With solemn feet I tread the hill,
  That overbrows the lonely vale.

O'er the bare upland, and away
  Through the long reach of desert woods,
The embracing sunbeams chastely play,
  And gladden these deep solitudes.

Where, twisted round the barren oak,
  The summer vine in beauty clung,
And summer winds the stillness broke,
  The crystal icicle is hung.

Where, from their frozen urns, mute springs
  Pour out the river's gradual tide,
Shrilly the skater's iron rings,
  And voices fill the woodland side.

Alas! how changed from the fair scene,
  When birds sang out their mellow lay,
And winds were soft, and woods were green,
  And the song ceased not with the day!

But still wild music is abroad,
  Pale, desert woods! within your crowd;
And gathering winds, in hoarse accord,
  Amid the vocal reeds pipe loud.

Chill airs and wintry winds! my ear
  Has grown familiar with your song;
I hear it in the opening year,
  I listen, and it cheers me long.



HYMN OF THE MORAVIAN NUNS OF BETHLEHEM

AT THE CONSECRATION OF PULASKI'S BANNER.

When the dying flame of day
Through the chancel shot its ray,
Far the glimmering tapers shed
Faint light on the cowled head;
And the censer burning swung,
Where, before the altar, hung
The crimson banner, that with prayer
Had been consecrated there.
And the nuns' sweet hymn was heard the while,
Sung low, in the dim, mysterious aisle.

   "Take thy banner!  May it wave
    Proudly o'er the good and brave;
    When the battle's distant wail
    Breaks the sabbath of our vale.
    When the clarion's music thrills
    To the hearts of these lone hills,
    When the spear in conflict shakes,
    And the strong lance shivering breaks.

   "Take thy banner! and, beneath
    The battle-cloud's encircling wreath,
    Guard it, till our homes are free!
    Guard it!  God will prosper thee!
    In the dark and trying hour,
    In the breaking forth of power,
    In the rush of steeds and men,
    His right hand will shield thee then.

    "Take thy banner!  But when night
     Closes round the ghastly fight,
     If the vanquished warrior bow,
     Spare him!  By our holy vow,
     By our prayers and many tears,
     By the mercy that endears,
     Spare him! he our love hath shared!
     Spare him! as thou wouldst be spared!

    "Take thy banner! and if e'er
     Thou shouldst press the soldier's bier,
     And the muffled drum should beat
     To the tread of mournful feet,
     Then this crimson flag shall be
     Martial cloak and shroud for thee."

The warrior took that banner proud,
And it was his martial cloak and shroud!



SUNRISE ON THE HILLS

  I stood upon the hills, when heaven's wide arch
Was glorious with the sun's returning march,
And woods were brightened, and soft gales
Went forth to kiss the sun-clad vales.
The clouds were far beneath me; bathed in light,
They gathered mid-way round the wooded height,
And, in their fading glory, shone
Like hosts in battle overthrown.
As many a pinnacle, with shifting glance.
Through the gray mist thrust up its shattered lance,
And rocking on the cliff was left
The dark pine blasted, bare, and cleft.
The veil of cloud was lifted, and below
Glowed the rich valley, and the river's flow
Was darkened by the forest's shade,
Or glistened in the white cascade;
Where upward, in the mellow blush of day,
The noisy bittern wheeled his spiral way.

  I heard the distant waters dash,
I saw the current whirl and flash,
And richly, by the blue lake's silver beach,
The woods were bending with a silent reach.
Then o'er the vale, with gentle swell,
The music of the village bell
Came sweetly to the echo-giving hills;
And the wild horn, whose voice the woodland fills,
Was ringing to the merry shout,
That faint and far the glen sent out,
Where, answering to the sudden shot, thin smoke,
Through thick-leaved branches, from the dingle broke.

  If thou art worn and hard beset
With sorrows, that thou wouldst forget,
If thou wouldst read a lesson, that will keep
Thy heart from fainting and thy soul from sleep,
Go to the woods and hills!  No tears
Dim the sweet look that Nature wears.



THE SPIRIT OF POETRY

There is a quiet spirit in these woods,
That dwells where'er the gentle south-wind blows;
Where, underneath the white-thorn, in the glade,
The wild flowers bloom, or, kissing the soft air,
The leaves above their sunny palms outspread.
With what a tender and impassioned voice
It fills the nice and delicate ear of thought,
When the fast ushering star of morning comes
O'er-riding the gray hills with golden scarf;
Or when the cowled and dusky-sandaled Eve,
In mourning weeds, from out the western gate,
Departs with silent pace!  That spirit moves
In the green valley, where the silver brook,
From its full laver, pours the white cascade;
And, babbling low amid the tangled woods,
Slips down through moss-grown stones with endless laughter.
And frequent, on the everlasting hills,
Its feet go forth, when it doth wrap itself
In all the dark embroidery of the storm,
And shouts the stern, strong wind.  And here, amid
The silent majesty of these deep woods,
Its presence shall uplift thy thoughts from earth,
As to the sunshine and the pure, bright air
Their tops the green trees lift.  Hence gifted bards
Have ever loved the calm and quiet shades.
For them there was an eloquent voice in all
The sylvan pomp of woods, the golden sun,
The flowers, the leaves, the river on its way,
Blue skies, and silver clouds, and gentle winds,
The swelling upland, where the sidelong sun
Aslant the wooded slope, at evening, goes,
Groves, through whose broken roof the sky looks in,
Mountain, and shattered cliff, and sunny vale,
The distant lake, fountains, and mighty trees,
In many a lazy syllable, repeating
Their old poetic legends to the wind.

   And this is the sweet spirit, that doth fill
The world; and, in these wayward days of youth,
My busy fancy oft embodies it,
As a bright image of the light and beauty
That dwell in nature; of the heavenly forms
We worship in our dreams, and the soft hues
That stain the wild bird's wing, and flush the clouds
When the sun sets.  Within her tender eye
The heaven of April, with its changing light,
And when it wears the blue of May, is hung,
And on her lip the rich, red rose.  Her hair
Is like the summer tresses of the trees,
When twilight makes them brown, and on her cheek
Blushes the richness of an autumn sky,
With ever-shifting beauty.  Then her breath,
It is so like the gentle air of Spring,
As, front the morning's dewy flowers, it comes
Full of their fragrance, that it is a joy
To have it round us, and her silver voice
Is the rich music of a summer bird,
Heard in the still night, with its passionate cadence.



BURIAL OF THE MINNISINK

On sunny slope and beechen swell,
The shadowed light of evening fell;
And, where the maple's leaf was brown,
With soft and silent lapse came down,
The glory, that the wood receives,
At sunset, in its golden leaves.

Far upward in the mellow light
Rose the blue hills.  One cloud of white,
Around a far uplifted cone,
In the warm blush of evening shone;
An image of the silver lakes,
By which the Indian's soul awakes.

But soon a funeral hymn was heard
Where the soft breath of evening stirred
The tall, gray forest; and a band
Of stern in heart, and strong in hand,
Came winding down beside the wave,
To lay the red chief in his grave.

They sang, that by his native bowers
He stood, in the last moon of flowers,
And thirty snows had not yet shed
Their glory on the warrior's head;
But, as the summer fruit decays,
So died he in those naked days.

A dark cloak of the roebuck's skin
Covered the warrior, and within
Its heavy folds the weapons, made
For the hard toils of war, were laid;
The cuirass, woven of plaited reeds,
And the broad belt of shells and beads.

Before, a dark-haired virgin train
Chanted the death dirge of the slain;
Behind, the long procession came
Of hoary men and chiefs of fame,
With heavy hearts, and eyes of grief,
Leading the war-horse of their chief.

Stripped of his proud and martial dress,
Uncurbed, unreined, and riderless,
With darting eye, and nostril spread,
And heavy and impatient tread,
He came; and oft that eye so proud
Asked for his rider in the crowd.

They buried the dark chief; they freed
Beside the grave his battle steed;
And swift an arrow cleaved its way
To his stern heart!  One piercing neigh
Arose, and, on the dead man's plain,
The rider grasps his steed again.



L' ENVOI

Ye voices, that arose
After the Evening's close,
And whispered to my restless heart repose!

Go, breathe it in the ear
Of all who doubt and fear,
And say to them, "Be of good cheer!"

Ye sounds, so low and calm,
That in the groves of balm
Seemed to me like an angel's psalm!

Go, mingle yet once more
With the perpetual roar
Of the pine forest dark and hoar!

Tongues of the dead, not lost
But speaking from deaths frost,
Like fiery tongues at Pentecost!

Glimmer, as funeral lamps,
Amid the chills and damps
Of the vast plain where Death encamps!

****************

BALLADS AND OTHER POEMS

THE SKELETON IN ARMOR

"Speak! speak I thou fearful guest
 Who, with thy hollow breast
 Still in rude armor drest,
   Comest to daunt me!
 Wrapt not in Eastern balms,
 Bat with thy fleshless palms
 Stretched, as if asking alms,
   Why dost thou haunt me?"

Then, from those cavernous eyes
Pale flashes seemed to rise,
As when the Northern skies
   Gleam in December;
And, like the water's flow
Under December's snow,
Came a dull voice of woe
   From the heart's chamber.

"I was a Viking old!
My deeds, though manifold,
No Skald in song has told,
   No Saga taught thee!
Take heed, that in thy verse
Thou dost the tale rehearse,
Else dread a dead man's curse;
   For this I sought thee.

"Far in the Northern Land,
By the wild Baltic's strand,
I, with my childish hand,
   Tamed the gerfalcon;
And, with my skates fast-bound,
Skimmed the half-frozen Sound,
   That the poor whimpering hound
Trembled to walk on.

"Oft to his frozen lair
Tracked I the grisly bear,
While from my path the hare
   Fled like a shadow;
Oft through the forest dark
Followed the were-wolf's bark,
Until the soaring lark
  Sang from the meadow.

"But when I older grew,
Joining a corsair's crew,
O'er the dark sea I flew
   With the marauders.
Wild was the life we led;
Many the souls that sped,
Many the hearts that bled,
  By our stern orders.

"Many a wassail-bout
Wore the long Winter out;
Often our midnight shout
  Set the cocks crowing,
As we the Berserk's tale
Measured in cups of ale,
Draining the oaken pail,
  Filled to o'erflowing.

"Once as I told in glee
Tales of the stormy sea,
Soft eyes did gaze on me,
  Burning yet tender;
And as the white stars shine
On the dark Norway pine,
On that dark heart of mine
  Fell their soft splendor.

"I wooed the blue-eyed maid,
Yielding, yet half afraid,
And in the forest's shade
  Our vows were plighted.
Under its loosened vest
Fluttered her little breast
Like birds within their nest
  By the hawk frighted.

"Bright in her father's hall
Shields gleamed upon the wall,
Loud sang the minstrels all,
  Chanting his glory;
When of old Hildebrand
I asked his daughter's hand,
Mute did the minstrels stand
  To hear my story.

"While the brown ale he quaffed,
Loud then the champion laughed,
And as the wind-gusts waft
  The sea-foam brightly,
So the loud laugh of scorn,
Out of those lips unshorn,
From the deep drinking-horn
  Blew the foam lightly.

"She was a Prince's child,
I but a Viking wild,
And though she blushed and smiled,
  I was discarded!
Should not the dove so white
Follow the sea-mew's flight,
Why did they leave that night
  Her nest unguarded?

"Scarce had I put to sea,
Bearing the maid with me,
Fairest of all was she
  Among the Norsemen!
When on the white sea-strand,
Waving his armed hand,
Saw we old Hildebrand,
  With twenty horsemen.

"Then launched they to the blast,
Bent like a reed each mast,
Yet we were gaining fast,
  When the wind failed us;
And with a sudden flaw
Came round the gusty Skaw,
So that our foe we saw
  Laugh as he hailed us.

"And as to catch the gale
Round veered the flapping sail,
Death I was the helmsman's hail,
  Death without quarter!
Mid-ships with iron keel
Struck we her ribs of steel
Down her black hulk did reel
  Through the black water!

"As with his wings aslant,
Sails the fierce cormorant,
Seeking some rocky haunt
  With his prey laden,
So toward the open main,
Beating to sea again,
Through the wild hurricane,
  Bore I the maiden.

"Three weeks we westward bore,
And when the storm was o'er,
Cloud-like we saw the shore
  Stretching to leeward;
There for my lady's bower
Built I the lofty tower,
Which, to this very hour,
  Stands looking seaward.

"There lived we many years;
Time dried the maiden's tears
She had forgot her fears,
  She was a mother.
Death closed her mild blue eyes,
Under that tower she lies;
Ne'er shall the sun arise
  On such another!

"Still grew my bosom then.
Still as a stagnant fen!
Hateful to me were men,
  The sunlight hateful!
In the vast forest here,
Clad in my warlike gear,
Fell I upon my spear,
  O, death was grateful!

"Thus, seamed with many scars,
Bursting these prison bars,
Up to its native stars
  My soul ascended!
There from the flowing bowl
Deep drinks the warrior's soul,
Skoal! to the Northland! skoal!"
  Thus the tale ended.



THE WRECK OF THE HESPERUS

It was the schooner Hesperus,
   That sailed the wintry sea;
And the skipper had taken his little daughter,
   To bear him company.

Blue were her eyes as the fairy-flax,
   Her cheeks like the dawn of day,
And her bosom white as the hawthorn buds,
   That ope in the month of May.

The skipper he stood beside the helm,
   His pipe was in his month,
And he watched how the veering flaw did blow
   The smoke now West, now South.

Then up and spake an old Sailor,
   Had sailed to the Spanish Main,
"I pray thee, put into yonder port,
   For I fear a hurricane.

"Last night, the moon had a golden ring,
   And to-night no moon we see!"
The skipper, he blew a whiff from his pipe,
   And a scornful laugh laughed he.

Colder and louder blew the wind,
   A gale from the Northeast.
The snow fell hissing in the brine,
   And the billows frothed like yeast.

Down came the storm, and smote amain
   The vessel in its strength;
She shuddered and paused, like a frighted steed,
   Then leaped her cable's length.

"Come hither! come hither! my little daughter,
   And do not tremble so;
For  I can weather the roughest gale
   That ever wind did blow."


He wrapped her warm in his seaman's coat
   Against the stinging blast;
He cut a rope from a broken spar,
   And bound her to the mast.

"O father! I hear the church-bells ring,
   O say, what may it be?"
 "'Tis a fog-bell on a rock-bound coast!"--
   And he steered for the open sea.

"O father! I hear the sound of guns,
   O say, what may it be?"
"Some ship in distress, that cannot live
   In such an angry sea!"

"O father! I see a gleaming light
   O say, what may it be?"
But the father answered never a word,
   A frozen corpse was he.

Lashed to the helm, all stiff and stark,
   With his face turned to the skies,
The lantern gleamed through the gleaming snow
   On his fixed and glassy eyes.

Then the maiden clasped her hands and prayed
   That saved she might be;
And she thought of Christ, who stilled the wave,
   On the Lake of Galilee.

And fast through the midnight dark and drear,
   Through the whistling sleet and snow,
Like a sheeted ghost, the vessel swept
   Tow'rds the reef of Norman's Woe.

And ever the fitful gusts between
   A sound came from the land;
It was the sound of the trampling surf
   On the rocks and the hard sea-sand.

The breakers were right beneath her bows,
   She drifted a dreary wreck,
And a whooping billow swept the crew
   Like icicles from her deck.

She struck where the white and fleecy waves
   Looked soft as carded wool,
But the cruel rocks, they gored her side
   Like the horns of an angry bull.

Her rattling shrouds, all sheathed in ice,
   With the masts went by the board;
Like a vessel of glass, she stove and sank,
   Ho! ho! the breakers roared!

At daybreak, on the bleak sea-beach,
   A fisherman stood aghast,
To see the form of a maiden fair,
   Lashed close to a drifting mast.

The salt sea was frozen on her breast,
   The salt tears in her eyes;
And he saw her hair, like the brown sea-weed,
   On the billows fall and rise.

Such was the wreck of the Hesperus,
   In the midnight and the snow!
Christ save us all from a death like this,
   On the reef of Norman's Woe!



THE VILLAGE BLACKSMITH

Under a spreading chestnut-tree
  The village smithy stands;
The smith, a mighty man is he,
  With large and sinewy hands;
And the muscles of his brawny arms
  Are strong as iron bands.

His hair is crisp, and black, and long,
  His face is like the tan;
His brow is wet with honest sweat,
  He earns whate'er he can,
And looks the whole world in the face,
  For he owes not any man.

Week in, week out, from morn till night,
  You can hear his bellows blow;
You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
  With measured beat and slow,
Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
  When the evening sun is low.

And children coming home from school
  Look in at the open door;
They love to see the flaming forge,
  And bear the bellows roar,
And catch the burning sparks that fly
  Like chaff from a threshing-floor.

He goes on Sunday to the church,
  And sits among his boys;
He hears the parson pray and preach,
  He hears his daughter's voice,
Singing in the village choir,
  And it makes his heart rejoice.

It sounds to him like her mother's voice,
  Singing in Paradise!
He needs must think of her once more,
  How in the grave she lies;
And with his hard, rough hand he wipes
  A tear out of his eyes.

Toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing,
  Onward through life he goes;
Each morning sees some task begin,
  Each evening sees it close
Something attempted, something done,
  Has earned a night's repose.

Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
For the lesson thou hast taught!
Thus at the flaming forge of life
  Our fortunes must be wrought;
Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
  Each burning deed and thought.



ENDYMION

The rising moon has hid the stars;
Her level rays, like golden bars,
   Lie on the landscape green,
   With shadows brown between.

And silver white the river gleams,
As if Diana, in her dreams,
   Had dropt her silver bow
   Upon the meadows low.

On such a tranquil night as this,
She woke Endymion with a kiss,
   When, sleeping in the grove,
   He dreamed not of her love.

Like Dian's kiss, unasked, unsought,
Love gives itself, but is not bought;
   Nor voice, nor sound betrays
   Its deep, impassioned gaze.

It comes,--the beautiful, the free,
The crown of all humanity,--
   In silence and alone
   To seek the elected one.

It lifts the boughs, whose shadows deep
Are Life's oblivion, the soul's sleep,
   And kisses the closed eyes
   Of him, who slumbering lies.

O weary hearts! O slumbering eyes!
O drooping souls, whose destinies
   Are fraught with fear and pain,
   Ye shall be loved again!

No one is so accursed by fate,
No one so utterly desolate,
   But some heart, though unknown,
   Responds unto his own.

Responds,--as if with unseen wings,
An angel touched its quivering strings;
   And whispers, in its song,
   "'Where hast thou stayed so long?"



IT IS NOT ALWAYS MAY

No hay pajaros en los nidos de antano.
                Spanish Proverb

The sun is bright,--the air is clear,
  The darting swallows soar and sing.
And from the stately elms I hear
  The bluebird prophesying Spring.

So blue you winding river flows,
  It seems an outlet from the sky,
Where waiting till the west-wind blows,
  The freighted clouds at anchor lie.

All things are new;--the buds, the leaves,
  That gild the elm-tree's nodding crest,
 And even the nest beneath the eaves;--
   There are no birds in last year's nest!

All things rejoice in youth and love,
   The fulness of their first delight!
 And learn from the soft heavens above
   The melting tenderness of night.

Maiden, that read'st this simple rhyme,
   Enjoy thy youth, it will not stay;
Enjoy the fragrance of thy prime,
   For oh, it is not always May!

Enjoy the Spring of Love and Youth,
   To some good angel leave the rest;
For Time will teach thee soon the truth,
  There are no birds in last year's nest!



THE RAINY DAY

The day is cold, and dark, and dreary
It rains, and the wind is never weary;
The vine still clings to the mouldering wall,
But at every gust the dead leaves fall,
    And the day is dark and dreary.

My life is cold, and dark, and dreary;
It rains, and the wind is never weary;
My thoughts still cling to the mouldering Past,
But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast,
    And the days are dark and dreary.

Be still, sad heart! and cease repining;
Behind the clouds is the sun still shining;
Thy fate is the common fate of all,
Into each life some rain must fall,
    Some days must be dark and dreary.



GOD'S-ACRE.

I like that ancient Saxon phrase, which calls
  The burial-ground God's-Acre! It is just;
It consecrates each grave within its walls,
  And breathes a benison o'er the sleeping dust.

God's-Acre! Yes, that blessed name imparts
  Comfort to those, who in the grave have sown
The seed that they had garnered in their hearts,
  Their bread of life, alas! no more their own.

Into its furrows shall we all be cast,
 In the sure faith, that we shall rise again
At the great harvest, when the archangel's blast
  Shall winnow, like a fan, the chaff and grain.

Then shall the good stand in immortal bloom,
 In the fair gardens of that second birth;
And each bright blossom mingle its perfume
 With that of flowers, which never bloomed on earth.

With thy rude ploughshare, Death, turn up the sod,
 And spread the furrow for the seed we sow;
This is the field and Acre of our God,
 This is the place where human harvests grow!



TO THE RIVER CHARLES.

River! that in silence windest
 Through the meadows, bright and free,
Till at length thy rest thou findest
 In the bosom of the sea!

Four long years of mingled feeling,
 Half in rest, and half in strife,
I have seen thy waters stealing
 Onward, like the stream of life.

Thou hast taught me, Silent River!
  Many a lesson, deep and long;
Thou hast been a generous giver;
  I can give thee but a song.

Oft in sadness and in illness,
  I have watched thy current glide,
Till the beauty of its stillness
  Overflowed me, like a tide.

And in better hours and brighter,
  When I saw thy waters gleam,
I have felt my heart beat lighter,
  And leap onward with thy stream.

Not for this alone I love thee,
  Nor because thy waves of blue
From celestial seas above thee
  Take their own celestial hue.

Where yon shadowy woodlands hide thee,
  And thy waters disappear,
Friends I love have dwelt beside thee,
  And have made thy margin dear.

More than this;--thy name reminds me
  Of three friends, all true and tried;
And that name, like magic, binds me
  Closer, closer to thy side.

Friends my soul with joy remembers!
  How like quivering flames they start,
When I fan the living embers
  On the hearth-stone of my heart!

'T is for this, thou Silent River!
  That my spirit leans to thee;
Thou hast been a generous giver,
  Take this idle song from me.



BLIND BARTIMEUS

Blind Bartimeus at the gates
Of Jericho in darkness waits;
He hears the crowd;--he hears a breath
Say, "It is Christ of Nazareth!"
And calls, in tones of agony,
<Greek here>

The thronging multitudes increase;
Blind Bartimeus, hold thy peace!
But still, above the noisy crowd,
The beggar's cry is shrill and loud;
Until they say, "He calleth thee!"
<Greek here>

Then saith the Christ, as silent stands
The crowd, "What wilt thou at my hands?"
And he replies, "O give me light!
Rabbi, restore the blind man's sight.
And Jesus answers, '<Greek here>'
<Greek here>!

Ye that have eyes, yet cannot see,
In darkness and in misery,
Recall those mighty Voices Three,
<Greek here>!
<Greek here>!
<Greek here>!



THE GOBLET OF LIFE

Filled is Life's goblet to the brim;
And though my eyes with tears are dim,
I see its sparkling bubbles swim,
And chant a melancholy hymn
   With solemn voice and slow.

No purple flowers,--no garlands green,
Conceal the goblet's shade or sheen,
Nor maddening draughts of Hippocrene,
Like gleams of sunshine, flash between
   Thick leaves of mistletoe.

This goblet, wrought with curious art,
Is filled with waters, that upstart,
When the deep fountains of the heart,
By strong convulsions rent apart,
   Are running all to waste.

And as it mantling passes round,
With fennel is it wreathed and crowned,
Whose seed and foliage sun-imbrowned
Are in its waters steeped and drowned,
   And give a bitter taste.

Above the lowly plants it towers,
The fennel, with its yellow flowers,
And in an earlier age than ours
Was gifted with the wondrous powers,
   Lost vision to restore.

It gave new strength, and fearless mood;
And gladiators, fierce and rude,
Mingled it in their daily food;
And he who battled and subdued,
   A wreath of fennel wore.

Then in Life's goblet freely press,
The leaves that give it bitterness,
Nor prize the colored waters less,
For in thy darkness and distress
   New light and strength they give!

And he who has not learned to know
How false its sparkling bubbles show,
How bitter are the drops of woe,
With which its brim may overflow,
   He has not learned to live.

The prayer of Ajax was for light;
Through all that dark and desperate fight
The blackness of that noonday night
He asked but the return of sight,
   To see his foeman's face.

Let our unceasing, earnest prayer
Be, too, for light,--for strength to bear
Our portion of the weight of care,
That crushes into dumb despair
   One half the human race.

O suffering, sad humanity!
O ye afflicted one; who lie
Steeped to the lips in misery,
Longing, and yet afraid to die,
   Patient, though sorely tried!

I pledge you in this cup of grief,
Where floats the fennel's bitter leaf!
The Battle of our Life is brief
The alarm,--the struggle,--the relief,
   Then sleep we side by side.



MAIDENHOOD

Maiden! with the meek, brown eyes,
In whose orbs a shadow lies
Like the dusk in evening skies!

Thou whose locks outshine the sun,
Golden tresses, wreathed in one,
As the braided streamlets run!

Standing, with reluctant feet,
Where the brook and river meet,
Womanhood and childhood fleet!

Gazing, with a timid glance,
On the brooklet's swift advance,
On the river's broad expanse!

Deep and still, that gliding stream
Beautiful to thee must seem,
As the river of a dream.

Then why pause with indecision,
When bright angels in thy vision
Beckon thee to fields Elysian?

Seest thou shadows sailing by,
As the dove, with startled eye,
Sees the falcon's shadow fly?

Hearest thou voices on the shore,
That our ears perceive no more,
Deafened by the cataract's roar?

O, thou child of many prayers!
Life hath quicksands,--Life hath snares
Care and age come unawares!

Like the swell of some sweet tune,
Morning rises into noon,
May glides onward into June.

Childhood is the bough, where slumbered
Birds and blossoms many-numbered;--
Age, that bough with snows encumbered.

Gather, then, each flower that grows,
When the young heart overflows,
To embalm that tent of snows.

Bear a lily in thy hand;
Gates of brass cannot withstand
One touch of that magic wand.

Bear through sorrow, wrong, and ruth,
In thy heart the dew of youth,
On thy lips the smile of truth!

O, that dew, like balm, shall steal
Into wounds that cannot heal,
Even as sleep our eyes doth seal;

And that smile, like sunshine, dart
Into many a sunless heart,
For a smile of God thou art.



EXCELSIOR

The shades of night were falling fast,
As through an Alpine village passed
A youth, who bore, 'mid snow and ice,
A banner with the strange device,
       Excelsior!

His brow was sad; his eye beneath,
Flashed like a falchion from its sheath,
And like a silver clarion rung
The accents of that unknown tongue,
       Excelsior!

In happy homes he saw the light
Of household fires gleam warm and bright;
Above, the spectral glaciers shone,
And from his lips escaped a groan,
       Excelsior!

"Try not the Pass!" the old man said:
"Dark lowers the tempest overhead,
The roaring torrent is deep and wide!
And loud that clarion voice replied,
       Excelsior!

"Oh stay," the maiden said, "and rest
Thy weary head upon this breast!"
A tear stood in his bright blue eye,
But still he answered, with a sigh,
       Excelsior!

"Beware the pine-tree's withered branch!
Beware the awful avalanche!"
This was the peasant's last Good-night,
A voice replied, far up the height,
        Excelsior!

At break of day, as heavenward
The pious monks of Saint Bernard
Uttered the oft-repeated prayer,
A voice cried through the startled air,
       Excelsior!

A traveller, by the faithful hound,
Half-buried in the snow was found,
Still grasping in his hand of ice
That banner with the strange device,
       Excelsior!

There in the twilight cold and gray,
Lifeless, but beautiful, he lay,
And from the sky, serene and far,
A voice fell, like a falling star,
       Excelsior!


**************

POEMS ON SLAVERY.

[The following poems, with one exception, were written at sea,
in the latter part of October, 1842.  I had not then heard of
Dr. Channing's death.  Since that event, the poem addressed to
him is no longer appropriate.  I have decided, however, to let
it remain as it was written, in testimony of my admiration for
a great and good man.]



TO WILLIAM E. CHANNING

The pages of thy book I read,
  And as I closed each one,
My heart, responding, ever said,
  "Servant of God! well done!"

Well done!  Thy words are great and bold;
  At times they seem to me,
Like Luther's, in the days of old,
  Half-battles for the free.

Go on, until this land revokes
  The old and chartered Lie,
The feudal curse, whose whips and yokes
  Insult humanity.

A voice is ever at thy side
  Speaking in tones of might,
Like the prophetic voice, that cried
  To John in Patmos, "Write!"

Write! and tell out this bloody tale;
  Record this dire eclipse,
This Day of Wrath, this Endless Wail,
  This dread Apocalypse!



THE SLAVE'S DREAM

Beside the ungathered rice he lay,
  His sickle in his hand;
His breast was bare, his matted hair
  Was buried in the sand.
Again, in the mist and shadow of sleep,
  He saw his Native Land.

Wide through the landscape of his dreams
  The lordly Niger flowed;
Beneath the palm-trees on the plain
  Once more a king he strode;
And heard the tinkling caravans
  Descend the mountain-road.

He saw once more his dark-eyed queen
  Among her children stand;
They clasped his neck, they kissed his cheeks,
  They held him by the hand!--
A tear burst from the sleeper's lids
  And fell into the sand.

And then at furious speed he rode
  Along the Niger's bank;
His bridle-reins were golden chains,
  And, with a martial clank,
At each leap he could feel his scabbard of steel
  Smiting his stallion's flank.

Before him, like a blood-red flag,
  The bright flamingoes flew;
From morn till night he followed their flight,
  O'er plains where the tamarind grew,
Till he saw the roofs of Caffre huts,
  And the ocean rose to view.

At night he heard the lion roar,
  And the hyena scream,
And the river-horse, as he crushed the reeds
  Beside some hidden stream;
And it passed, like a glorious roll of drums,
  Through the triumph of his dream.

The forests, with their myriad tongues,
  Shouted of liberty;
And the Blast of the Desert cried aloud,
  With a voice so wild and free,
That he started in his sleep and smiled
  At their tempestuous glee.

He did not feel the driver's whip,
  Nor the burning heat of day;
For Death had illumined the Land of Sleep,
  And his lifeless body lay
A worn-out fetter, that the soul
  Had broken and thrown away!



THE GOOD PART

THAT SHALL NOT BE TAKEN AWAY

She dwells by Great Kenhawa's side,
  In valleys green and cool;
And all her hope and all her pride
  Are in the village school.

Her soul, like the transparent air
  That robes the hills above,
Though not of earth, encircles there
  All things with arms of love.

And thus she walks among her girls
  With praise and mild rebukes;
Subduing e'en rude village churls
  By her angelic looks.

She reads to them at eventide
  Of One who came to save;
To cast the captive's chains aside
  And liberate the slave.

And oft the blessed time foretells
  When all men shall be free;
And musical, as silver bells,
  Their falling chains shall be.

And following her beloved Lord,
  In decent poverty,
She makes her life one sweet record
  And deed of charity.

For she was rich, and gave up all
  To break the iron bands
Of those who waited in her hall,
  And labored in her lands.

Long since beyond the Southern Sea
  Their outbound sails have sped,
While she, in meek humility,
  Now earns her daily bread.

It is their prayers, which never cease,
  That clothe her with such grace;
Their blessing is the light of peace
  That shines upon her face.



THE SLAVE IN THE DISMAL SWAMP

In dark fens of the Dismal Swamp
  The hunted Negro lay;
He saw the fire of the midnight camp,
And heard at times a horse's tramp
  And a bloodhound's distant bay.

Where will-o'-the-wisps and glow-worms shine,
  In bulrush and in brake;
Where waving mosses shroud the pine,
And the cedar grows, and the poisonous vine
  Is spotted like the snake;

Where hardly a human foot could pass,
  Or a human heart would dare,
On the quaking turf of the green morass
He crouched in the rank and tangled grass,
  Like a wild beast in his lair.

A poor old slave, infirm and lame;
  Great scars deformed his face;
On his forehead he bore the brand of shame,
And the rags, that hid his mangled frame,
  Were the livery of disgrace.

All things above were bright and fair,
  All things were glad and free;
Lithe squirrels darted here and there,
And wild birds filled the echoing air
  With songs of Liberty!

On him alone was the doom of pain,
  From the morning of his birth;
On him alone the curse of Cain
Fell, like a flail on the garnered grain,
  And struck him to the earth!



THE SLAVE SINGING AT MIDNIGHT

Loud he sang the psalm of David!
He, a Negro and enslaved,
Sang of Israel's victory,
Sang of Zion, bright and free.

In that hour, when night is calmest,
Sang he from the Hebrew Psalmist,
In a voice so sweet and clear
That I could not choose but hear,

Songs of triumph, and ascriptions,
Such as reached the swart Egyptians,
When upon the Red Sea coast
Perished Pharaoh and his host.

And the voice of his devotion
Filled my soul with strange emotion;
For its tones by turns were glad,
Sweetly solemn, wildly sad.

Paul and Silas, in their prison,
Sang of Christ, the Lord arisen,
And an earthquake's arm of might
Broke their dungeon-gates at night.

But, alas! what holy angel
Brings the Slave this glad evangel?
And what earthquake's arm of might
Breaks his dungeon-gates at night?



THE WITNESSES

In Ocean's wide domains,
  Half buried in the sands,
Lie skeletons in chains,
  With shackled feet and hands.

Beyond the fall of dews,
  Deeper than plummet lies,
Float ships, with all their crews,
  No more to sink nor rise.

There the black Slave-ship swims,
  Freighted with human forms,
Whose fettered, fleshless limbs
  Are not the sport of storms.

These are the bones of Slaves;
  They gleam from the abyss;
They cry, from yawning waves,
  "We are the Witnesses!"

Within Earth's wide domains
  Are markets for men's lives;
Their necks are galled with chains,
  Their wrists are cramped with gyves.

Dead bodies, that the kite
  In deserts makes its prey;
Murders, that with affright
  Scare school-boys from their play!

All evil thoughts and deeds;
  Anger, and lust, and pride;
The foulest, rankest weeds,
  That choke Life's groaning tide!

These are the woes of Slaves;
  They glare from the abyss;
They cry, from unknown graves,
  "We are the Witnesses!



THE QUADROON GIRL

The Slaver in the broad lagoon
  Lay moored with idle sail;
He waited for the rising moon,
  And for the evening gale.

Under the shore his boat was tied,
  And all her listless crew
Watched the gray alligator slide
  Into the still bayou.

Odors of orange-flowers, and spice,
  Reached them from time to time,
Like airs that breathe from Paradise
  Upon a world of crime.

The Planter, under his roof of thatch,
  Smoked thoughtfully and slow;
The Slaver's thumb was on the latch,
  He seemed in haste to go.

He said, "My ship at anchor rides
  In yonder broad lagoon;
I only wait the evening tides,
  And the rising of the moon.

Before them, with her face upraised,
  In timid attitude,
Like one half curious, half amazed,
  A Quadroon maiden stood.

Her eyes were large, and full of light,
  Her arms and neck were bare;
No garment she wore save a kirtle bright,
  And her own long, raven hair.

And on her lips there played a smile
  As holy, meek, and faint,
As lights in some cathedral aisle
  The features of a saint.

"The soil is barren,--the farm is old";
  The thoughtful planter said;
Then looked upon the Slaver's gold,
  And then upon the maid.

His heart within him was at strife
  With such accursed gains:
For he knew whose passions gave her life,
  Whose blood ran in her veins.

But the voice of nature was too weak;
  He took the glittering gold!
Then pale as death grew the maiden's cheek,
  Her hands as icy cold.

The Slaver led her from the door,
  He led her by the hand,
To be his slave and paramour
  In a strange and distant land!



THE WARNING

Beware!  The Israelite of old, who tore
  The lion in his path,--when, poor and blind,
He saw the blessed light of heaven no more,
  Shorn of his noble strength and forced to grind
In prison, and at last led forth to be
A pander to Philistine revelry,--

Upon the pillars of the temple laid
  His desperate hands, and in its overthrow
Destroyed himself, and with him those who made
  A cruel mockery of his sightless woe;
The poor, blind Slave, the scoff and jest of all,
Expired, and thousands perished in the fall!

There is a poor, blind Samson in this land,
  Shorn of his strength and bound in bonds of steel,
Who may, in some grim revel, raise his hand,
  And shake the pillars of this Commonweal,
Till the vast Temple of our liberties.
A shapeless mass of wreck and rubbish lies.


*******************

THE SPANISH STUDENT

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

VICTORIAN
HYPOLITO                        Students of Alcala.

THE COUNT OF LARA
DON CARLOS                      Gentlemen of Madrid.

THE ARCHBISHOP OF TOLEDO.
A CARDINAL.
BELTRAN CRUZADO                 Count of the Gypsies.
BARTOLOME ROMAN                 A young Gypsy.
THE PADRE CURA OF GUADARRAMA.
PEDRO CRESPO                    Alcalde.
PANCHO                          Alguacil.
FRANCISCO                       Lara's Servant.
CHISPA                          Victorian's Servant.
BALTASAR                        Innkeeper.
PRECIOSA                        A Gypsy Girl.
ANGELICA                        A poor Girl.
MARTINA                         The Padre Cura's Niece.
DOLORES                         Preciosa's Maid.
Gypsies, Musicians, etc.


ACT I.

SCENE I.--The COUNT OF LARA'S chambers.  Night.  The COUNT in his
dressing-gown, smoking and conversing with DON CARLOS.

  Lara.  You were not at the play tonight, Don Carlos;
How happened it?

  Don C.  I had engagements elsewhere.
Pray who was there?

  Lara.  Why all the town and court.
The house was crowded; and the busy fans
Among the gayly dressed and perfumed ladies
Fluttered like butterflies among the flowers.
There was the Countess of Medina Celi;
The Goblin Lady with her Phantom Lover,
Her Lindo Don Diego; Dona Sol,
And Dona Serafina, and her cousins.

  Don C.  What was the play?

  Lara.  It was a dull affair;
One of those comedies in which you see,
As Lope says, the history of the world
Brought down from Genesis to the Day of Judgment.
There were three duels fought in the first act,
Three gentlemen receiving deadly wounds,
Laying their hands upon their hearts, and saying,
"O, I am dead!" a lover in a closet,
An old hidalgo, and a gay Don Juan,
A Dona Inez with a black mantilla,
Followed at twilight by an unknown lover,
Who looks intently where he knows she is not!

  Don C.  Of course, the Preciosa danced to-night?

  Lara.  And never better.  Every footstep fell
As lightly as a sunbeam on the water.
I think the girl extremely beautiful.

  Don C.  Almost beyond the privilege of woman!
I saw her in the Prado yesterday.
Her step was royal,--queen-like,--and her face
As beautiful as a saint's in Paradise.

  Lara.  May not a saint fall from her Paradise,
And be no more a saint?

  Don C.      Why do you ask?

  Lara.  Because I have heard it said this angel fell,
And though she is a virgin outwardly,
Within she is a sinner; like those panels
Of doors and altar-pieces the old monks
Painted in convents, with the Virgin Mary
On the outside, and on the inside Venus!

  Don C.  You do her wrong; indeed, you do her wrong!
She is as virtuous as she is fair.

  Lara.  How credulous you are!  Why look you, friend,
There's not a virtuous woman in Madrid,
In this whole city!  And would you persuade me
That a mere dancing-girl, who shows herself,
Nightly, half naked, on the stage, for money,
And with voluptuous motions fires the blood
Of inconsiderate youth, is to be held
A model for her virtue?

  Don C.         You forget
She is a Gypsy girl.

  Lara.        And therefore won
The easier.

  Don C.  Nay, not to be won at all!
The only virtue that a Gypsy prizes
Is chastity.  That is her only virtue.
Dearer than life she holds it.  I remember
A Gypsy woman, a vile, shameless bawd,
Whose craft was to betray the young and fair;
And yet this woman was above all bribes.
And when a noble lord, touched by her beauty,
The wild and wizard beauty of her race,
Offered her gold to be what she made others,
She turned upon him, with a look of scorn,
And smote him in the face!

  Lara.        And does that prove
That Preciosa is above suspicion?

  Don C.  It proves a nobleman may be repulsed
When he thinks conquest easy.  I believe
That woman, in her deepest degradation,
Holds something sacred, something undefiled,
Some pledge and keepsake of her higher nature,
And, like the diamond in the dark, retains
Some quenchless gleam of the celestial light!

  Lara.  Yet Preciosa would have taken the gold.

  Don C.  (rising).  I do not think so.

  Lara.         I am sure of it.
But why this haste?  Stay yet a little longer,
And fight the battles of your Dulcinea.

  Don C.  'T is late.  I must begone, for if I stay
You will not be persuaded.

  Lara.         Yes; persuade me.

  Don C.  No one so deaf as he who will not hear!

  Lara.  No one so blind as he who will not see!

  Don C.  And so good night.  I wish you pleasant dreams,
And greater faith in woman.      [Exit.

  Lara.          Greater faith!
I have the greatest faith; for I believe
Victorian is her lover.  I believe
That I shall be to-morrow; and thereafter
Another, and another, and another,
Chasing each other through her zodiac,
As Taurus chases Aries.

(Enter FRANCISCO with a casket.)

                Well, Francisco,
What speed with Preciosa?

  Fran.         None, my lord.
She sends your jewels back, and bids me tell you
She is not to be purchased by your gold.

  Lara.  Then I will try some other way to win her.
Pray, dost thou know Victorian?

  Fran.          Yes, my lord;
I saw him at the jeweller's to-day.

  Lara.  What was he doing there?

  Fran.         I saw him buy
A golden ring, that had a ruby in it.

  Lara.  Was there another like it?

  Fran.          One so like it
I could not choose between them.

  Lara.             It is well.
To-morrow morning bring that ring to me.
Do not forget. Now light me to my bed.
                    [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- A street in Madrid.  Enter CHISPA, followed by
musicians, with a bagpipe, guitars, and other instruments.

  Chispa.  Abernuncio Satanas! and a plague on all lovers who
ramble  about at night, drinking the elements, instead of
sleeping quietly in  their beds.  Every dead man to his cemetery,
say I; and every friar to his monastery.  Now, here's my master,
Victorian, yesterday a cow-keeper, and to-day a gentleman;
yesterday a student, and to-day a lover; and I must be up later
than the nightingale, for as the abbot sings so must the
sacristan respond.  God grant he may soon be  married, for then
shall all this serenading cease.  Ay, marry! marry!  marry!
Mother, what does marry mean?  It means to spin, to bear
children, and to weep, my daughter!  And, of a truth, there is
something more in matrimony than the wedding-ring.  (To the
musicians.)  And now, gentlemen, Pax vobiscum! as the ass said to
the cabbages.  Pray, walk this way; and don't hang down your
heads. It is no disgrace to have an old father and a ragged
shirt.  Now, look you,  you are gentlemen who lead the life of
crickets; you enjoy hunger by  day and noise by night.  Yet, I
beseech you, for this once be not loud, but pathetic; for it is a
serenade to a damsel in bed, and not to the Man in the Moon.
Your object is not to arouse and terrify, but to soothe and bring
lulling dreams.  Therefore, each shall not play upon his
instrument as if it were the only one in the universe, but
gently, and with a certain modesty, according with the others.
Pray, how may I call thy name, friend?

  First Mus.  Geronimo Gil, at your service.

  Chispa.  Every tub smells of the wine that is in it.  Pray,
Geronimo, is not Saturday an unpleasant day with thee?

  First Mus.  Why so?

  Chispa.  Because I have heard it said that Saturday is an
unpleasant day with those who have but one shirt.  Moreover, I
have seen thee at the tavern, and if thou canst run as fast as
thou canst  drink, I should like to hunt hares with thee.  What
instrument is that?

  First Mus.  An Aragonese bagpipe.

  Chispa.  Pray, art thou related to the bagpiper of Bujalance,
who  asked a maravedi for playing, and ten for leaving off?

  First Mus.  No, your honor.

  Chispa.  I am glad of it.  What other instruments have we?

  Second and Third Musicians.  We play the bandurria.

  Chispa.  A pleasing instrument. And thou?

  Fourth Mus.  The fife.

  Chispa.  I like it; it has a cheerful, soul-stirring sound,
that soars up to my lady's window like the song of a swallow.
And you others?

  Other Mus.  We are the singers, please your honor.

  Chispa.  You are too many.  Do you think we are going to sing
mass in the cathedral of Cordova?  Four men can make but little
use of one shoe, and I see not how you can all sing in one song.
But follow me along the garden wall.  That is the way my master
climbs to the lady's window, it is by the Vicar's skirts that the
Devil climbs into the belfry.  Come, follow me, and make no
noise.
               [Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- PRECIOSA'S chamber. She stands at the open window.

  Prec.  How slowly through the lilac-scented air
Descends the tranquil moon!  Like thistle-down
The vapory clouds float in the peaceful sky;
And sweetly from yon hollow vaults of shade
The nightingales breathe out their souls in song.
And hark! what songs of love, what soul-like sounds,
Answer them from below!

SERENADE.

Stars of the summer night!
    Far in yon azure deeps,
Hide, hide your golden light!
    She sleeps!
My lady sleeps!
    Sleeps!

Moon of the summer night!
    Far down yon western steeps,
Sink, sink in silver light!
    She sleeps!
My lady sleeps!
    Sleeps!

Wind of the summer night!
    Where yonder woodbine creeps,
Fold, fold thy pinions light!
    She sleeps!
My lady sleeps!
    Sleeps!

Dreams of the summer night!
    Tell her, her lover keeps
Watch! while in slumbers light
    She sleeps
My lady sleeps
    Sleeps!

(Enter VICTORIAN by the balcony.)

  Vict.  Poor little dove!  Thou tremblest like a leaf!

  Prec.  I am so frightened!  'T is for thee I tremble!
I hate to have thee climb that wall by night!
Did no one see thee?

  Vict.       None, my love, but thou.

 Prec. 'T is very dangerous; and when thou art gone
I chide myself for letting thee come here
Thus stealthily by night.  Where hast thou been?
Since yesterday I have no news from thee.

  Vict.  Since yesterday I have been in Alcala.
Erelong the time will come, sweet Preciosa,
When that dull distance shall no more divide us;
And I no more shall scale thy wall by night
To steal a kiss from thee, as I do now.

  Prec.  An honest thief, to steal but what thou givest.

  Vict.  And we shall sit together unmolested,
And words of true love pass from tongue to tongue,
As singing birds from one bough to another.

  Prec.  That were a life to make time envious!
I knew that thou wouldst come to me to-night.
I saw thee at the play.

  Vict.        Sweet child of air!
Never did I behold thee so attired
And garmented in beauty as to-night!
What hast thou done to make thee look so fair?

  Prec.  Am I not always fair?

  Vict.         Ay, and so fair
That I am jealous of all eyes that see thee,
And wish that they were blind.

  Prec.        I heed them not;
When thou art present, I see none but thee!

  Vict.  There's nothing fair nor beautiful, but takes
Something from thee, that makes it beautiful.

  Prec.  And yet thou leavest me for those dusty books.

  Vict.  Thou comest between me and those books too often!
I see thy face in everything I see!
The paintings in the chapel wear thy looks,
The canticles are changed to sarabands,
And with the leaned doctors of the schools
I see thee dance cachuchas.

  Prec.         In good sooth,
I dance with learned doctors of the schools
To-morrow morning.

  Vict.  And with whom, I pray?

  Prec.  A grave and reverend Cardinal, and his Grace
The Archbishop of Toledo.

  Vict.        What mad jest
Is this?

  Prec.  It is no jest; indeed it is not.

  Vict.    Prithee, explain thyself.

  Prec.         Why, simply thus.
Thou knowest the Pope has sent here into Spain
To put a stop to dances on the stage.

  Vict.  I have heard it whispered.

  Prec.        Now the Cardinal,
Who for this purpose comes, would fain behold
With his own eyes these dances; and the Archbishop
Has sent for me--

  Vict.  That thou mayst dance before them!
Now viva la cachucha!  It will breathe
The fire of youth into these gray old men!
'T will be thy proudest conquest!

 Prec.            Saving one.
And yet I fear these dances will be stopped,
And Preciosa be once more a beggar.

  Vict.  The sweetest beggar that e'er asked for alms;
With such beseeching eyes, that when I saw thee
I gave my heart away!

  Prec.      Dost thou remember
When first we met?

  Vict.      It was at Cordova,
In the cathedral garden. Thou wast sitting
Under the orange-trees, beside a fountain.

  Prec. 'T was Easter-Sunday.  The full-blossomed trees
Filled all the air with fragrance and with joy.
The priests were singing, and the organ sounded,
And then anon the great cathedral bell.
It was the elevation of the Host.
We both of us fell down upon our knees,
Under the orange boughs, and prayed together.
I never had been happy till that moment.

  Vict.  Thou blessed angel!

  Prec.     And when thou wast gone
I felt an acting here.  I did not speak
To any one that day.  But from that day
Bartolome grew hateful unto me.

  Vict.  Remember him no more.  Let not his shadow
Come between thee and me.  Sweet Preciosa!
I loved thee even then, though I was silent!

  Prec.  I thought I ne'er should see thy face again.
Thy farewell had a sound of sorrow in it.

  Vict.  That was the first sound in the song of love!
Scarce more than silence is, and yet a sound.
Hands of invisible spirits touch the strings
Of that mysterious instrument, the soul,
And play the prelude of our fate.  We hear
The voice prophetic, and are not alone.

  Prec.  That is my faith.  Dust thou believe these warnings?

  Vict.  So far as this.  Our feelings and our thoughts
Tend ever on, and rest not in the Present.
As drops of rain fall into some dark well,
And from below comes a scarce audible sound,
So fall our thoughts into the dark Hereafter,
And their mysterious echo reaches us.

   Prec.  I have felt it so, but found no words to say it!
I cannot reason; I can only feel!
But thou hast language for all thoughts and feelings.
Thou art a scholar; and sometimes I think
We cannot walk together in this world!
The distance that divides us is too great!
Henceforth thy pathway lies among the stars;
I must not hold thee back.

  Vict.        Thou little sceptic!
Dost thou still doubt?  What I most prize in woman
Is her affections, not her intellect!
The intellect is finite; but the affections
Are infinite, and cannot be exhausted.
Compare me with the great men of the earth;
What am I?  Why, a pygmy among giants!
But if thou lovest,--mark me! I say lovest,
The greatest of thy sex excels thee not!
The world of the affections is thy world,
Not that of man's ambition.  In that stillness
Which most becomes a woman, calm and holy,
Thou sittest by the fireside of the heart,
Feeding its flame.  The element of fire
Is pure.  It cannot change nor hide its nature,
But burns as brightly in a Gypsy camp
As in a palace hall.  Art thou convinced?

  Prec.  Yes, that I love thee, as the good love heaven;
But not that I am worthy of that heaven.
How shall I more deserve it?

  Vict.           Loving more.

  Prec.  I cannot love thee more; my heart is full.

  Vict.  Then let it overflow, and I will drink it,
As in the summer-time the thirsty sands
Drink the swift waters of the Manzanares,
And still do thirst for more.

 A  Watchman (in the street).  Ave Maria
Purissima!  'T is midnight and serene!

  Vict.  Hear'st thou that cry?

  Prec.      It is a hateful sound,
To scare thee from me!

  Vict.      As the hunter's horn
Doth scare the timid stag, or bark of hounds
The moor-fowl from his mate.

  Prec.        Pray, do not go!

  Vict.  I must away to Alcala to-night.
Think of me when I am away.

  Prec.            Fear not!
I have no thoughts that do not think of thee.

  Vict.  (giving her a ring).
And to remind thee of my love, take this;
A serpent, emblem of Eternity;
A ruby,--say, a drop of my heart's blood.

  Prec.  It is an ancient saying, that the ruby
Brings gladness to the wearer, and preserves
The heart pure, and, if laid beneath the pillow,
Drives away evil dreams.  But then, alas!
It was a serpent tempted Eve to sin.

  Vict.  What convent of barefooted Carmelites
 Taught thee so much theology?

  Prec. (laying her hand upon his mouth).  Hush! hush!
Good night! and may all holy angels guard thee!

  Vict.  Good night! good night!  Thou art my guardian angel!
I have no other saint than thou to pray to!

(He descends by the balcony.)

  Prec.  Take care, and do not hurt thee.  Art thou safe?

  Vict.  (from the garden).
Safe as my love for thee!  But art thou safe?
Others can climb a balcony by moonlight
As well as I.  Pray shut thy window close;
I am jealous of the perfumed air of night
That from this garden climbs to kiss thy lips.

  Prec.  (throwing down her handkerchief).
Thou silly child!  Take this to blind thine eyes.
It is my benison!

  Vict.      And brings to me
Sweet fragrance from thy lips, as the soft wind
Wafts to the out-bound mariner the breath
Of the beloved land he leaves behind.

  Prec.  Make not thy voyage long.

  Vict.        To-morrow night
Shall see me safe returned.  Thou art the star
To guide me to an anchorage.  Good night!
My beauteous star!  My star of love, good night!

  Prec. Good night!

  Watchman (at a distance).  Ave Maria Purissima!



Scene IV. -- An inn on the road to Alcala.
BALTASAR asleep on a bench.  Enter CHISPA.

  Chispa.  And here we are, halfway to Alcala, between cocks and
midnight.  Body o' me! what an inn this is!  The lights out, and
the  landlord asleep.  Hola! ancient Baltasar!

  Bal. (waking).  Here I am.

  Chispa.  Yes, there you are, like a one-eyed Alcalde in a town
without inhabitants.  Bring a light, and let me have supper.

  Bal.  Where is your master?

  Chispo.  Do not trouble yourself about him.  We have stopped a
moment to breathe our horses; and, if he chooses to walk up and
down in the open air, looking into the sky as one who hears it
rain, that does not satisfy my hunger, you know.  But be quick,
for I am in a hurry, and every man stretches his legs according
to the length of his coverlet.  What have we here?

  Bal. (setting a light on the table).  Stewed rabbit.

  Chispa (eating).  Conscience of Portalegre! Stewed kitten, you
mean!

  Bal.  And a pitcher of Pedro Ximenes, with a roasted pear in
it.

  Chispa (drinking).  Ancient Baltasar, amigo!  You know how to
cry wine and sell vinegar.  I tell you this is nothing but Vino
Tinto of La Mancha, with a tang of the swine-skin.

  Bal.  I swear to you by Saint Simon and Judas, it is all as I
say.

  Chispa.  And I swear to you by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, that
it is no such thing.  Moreover, your supper is like the hidalgo's
dinner, very little meat and a great deal of tablecloth.

  Bal.  Ha! ha! ha!

  Chispa. And more noise than nuts.

  Bal.  Ha! ha! ha!  You must have your joke, Master Chispa.  But
shall I not ask Don Victorian in, to take a draught of the Pedro
Ximenes?

  Chispa.  No; you might as well say, "Don't-you-want-some?" to a
dead man.

  Bal.  Why does he go so often to Madrid?

  Chispa.  For the same reason that he eats no supper.  He is in
love.  Were you ever in love, Baltasar?

  Bal.  I was never out of it, good Chispa.  It has been the
torment of my life.

  Chispa.  What! are you on fire, too, old hay-stack?  Why, we
shall never be able to put you out.

  Vict. (without).  Chispa!

  Chispa.  Go to bed, Pero Grullo, for the cocks are crowing.

  Vict.  Ea! Chispa! Chispa!

  Chispa.  Ea! Senor.  Come with me, ancient Baltasar, and bring
water for the horses.  I will pay for the supper tomorrow.
           [Exeunt.



SCENE V. -- VICTORIAN'S chambers at  Alcala.  HYPOLITO asleep in
an arm-chair.  He awakes slowly.

  Hyp.  I must have been asleep! ay, sound asleep!
And it was all a dream.  O sleep, sweet sleep
Whatever form thou takest, thou art fair,
Holding unto our lips thy goblet filled
Out of Oblivion's well, a healing draught!
The candles have burned low; it must be late.
Where can Victorian be?  Like Fray Carrillo,
The only place in which one cannot find him
Is his own cell.  Here's his guitar, that seldom
Feels the caresses of its master's hand.
Open thy silent lips, sweet instrument!
And make dull midnight merry with a song.

 (He plays and sings.)

Padre Francisco!
Padre Francisco!
What do you want of Padre Francisco?
Here is a pretty young maiden
Who wants to confess her sins!
Open the door and let her come in,
I will shrive her from every sin.

(Enter VICTORIAN.)

  Vict.  Padre Hypolito!  Padre Hypolito!

  Hyp.  What do you want of Padre Hypolito?

  Vict.  Come, shrive me straight; for, if love be a sin,
I am the greatest sinner that doth live.
I will confess the sweetest of all crimes,
A maiden wooed and won.

  Hyp.        The same old tale
Of the old woman in the chimney-corner,
Who, while the pot boils, says, "Come here, my child;
I'll tell thee a story of my wedding-day."

  Vict.  Nay, listen, for my heart is full; so full
That I must speak.

  Hyp.    Alas! that heart of thine
Is like a scene in the old play; the curtain
Rises to solemn music, and lo! enter
The eleven thousand virgins of Cologne!

  Vict.  Nay, like the Sibyl's volumes, thou shouldst say;
Those that remained, after the six were burned,
Being held more precious than the nine together.
But listen to my tale.  Dost thou remember
The Gypsy girl we saw at Cordova
Dance the Romalis in the market-place?

  Hyp.  Thou meanest Preciosa.

  Vict.          Ay, the same.
Thou knowest how her image haunted me
Long after we returned to Alcala.
She's in Madrid.

  Hyp.      I know it.

  Vict.         And I'm in love.

  Hyp.  And therefore in Madrid when thou shouldst be
In Alcala.

  Vict.  O pardon me, my friend,
If I so long have kept this secret from thee;
But silence is the charm that guards such treasures,
And, if a word be spoken ere the time,
They sink again, they were not meant for us.

  Hyp.  Alas! alas!  I see thou art in love.
Love keeps the cold out better than a cloak.
It serves for food and raiment.  Give a Spaniard
His mass, his olla, and his Dona Luisa--
Thou knowest the proverb.  But pray tell me, lover,
How speeds thy wooing?  Is the maiden coy?
Write her a song, beginning with an Ave;
Sing as the monk sang to the Virgin Mary,

     Ave! cujus calcem clare
     Nec centenni commendare
        Sciret Seraph studio!

  Vict.  Pray, do not jest!  This is no time for it!
I am in earnest!

  Hyp.         Seriously enamored?
What, ho!  The Primus of great Alcala
Enamored of a Gypsy?  Tell me frankly,
How meanest thou?

  Vict.       I mean it honestly.

  Hyp.  Surely thou wilt not marry her!

  Vict.             Why not?

  Hyp.  She was betrothed to one Bartolome,
If I remember rightly, a young Gypsy
Who danced with her at Cordova.

  Vict.      They quarrelled,
And so the matter ended.

  Hyp.            But in truth
Thou wilt not marry her.

  Vict.         In truth I will.
The angels sang in heaven when she was born!
She is a precious jewel I have found
Among the filth and rubbish of the world.
I'll stoop for it; but when I wear it here,
Set on my forehead like the morning star,
The world may wonder, but it will not laugh.

  Hyp.  If thou wear'st nothing else upon thy forehead,
'T will be indeed a wonder.

  Vict.          Out upon thee
With thy unseasonable jests!  Pray tell me,
Is there no virtue in the world?

  Hyp.            Not much.
What, think'st thou, is she doing at this moment;
Now, while we speak of her?

  Vict.         She lies asleep,
And from her parted lips her gentle breath
Comes like the fragrance from the lips of flowers.
Her tender limbs are still, and on her breast
The cross she prayed to, ere she fell asleep,
Rises and falls with the soft tide of dreams,
Like a light barge safe moored.

  Hyp.     Which means, in prose,
She's sleeping with her mouth a little open!

  Vict.  O, would I had the old magician's glass
To see her as she lies in childlike sleep!

  Hyp.  And wouldst thou venture?

  Vict.      Ay, indeed I would!

  Hyp.  Thou art courageous.  Hast thou e'er reflected
How much lies hidden in that one word, NOW?

  Vict.  Yes; all the awful mystery of Life!
I oft have thought, my dear Hypolito,
That could we, by some spell of magic, change
The world and its inhabitants to stone,
In the same attitudes they now are in,
What fearful glances downward might we cast
Into the hollow chasms of human life!
What groups should we behold about the death-bed,
Putting to shame the group of Niobe!
What joyful welcomes, and what sad farewells!
What stony tears in those congealed eyes!
What visible joy or anguish in those cheeks!
What bridal pomps, and what funereal shows!
What foes, like gladiators, fierce and struggling!
What lovers with their marble lips together!

  Hyp.  Ay, there it is! and, if I were in love,
That is the very point I most should dread.
This magic glass, these magic spells of thine,
Might tell a tale were better left untold.
For instance, they might show us thy fair cousin,
The Lady Violante, bathed in tears
Of love and anger, like the maid of Colchis,
Whom thou, another faithless Argonaut,
Having won that golden fleece, a woman's love,
Desertest for this Glauce.

  Vict.          Hold thy peace!
She cares not for me.  She may wed another,
Or go into a convent, and, thus dying,
Marry Achilles in the Elysian Fields.

 Hyp. (rising).  And so, good night!  Good morning, I should say.

(Clock strikes three.)

Hark! how the loud and ponderous mace of Time
Knocks at the golden portals of the day!
And so, once more, good night!  We'll speak more largely
Of Preciosa when we meet again.
Get thee to bed, and the magician, Sleep,
Shall show her to thee, in his magic glass,
In all her loveliness.  Good night!
                                  [Exit.

  Vict.         Good night!
But not to bed; for I must read awhile.

(Throws himself into the arm-chair which HYPOLITO has left, and
lays a large book open upon his knees.)

Must read, or sit in revery and watch
The changing color of the waves that break
Upon the idle sea-shore of the mind!
Visions of Fame! that once did visit me,
Making night glorious with your smile, where are ye?
O, who shall give me, now that ye are gone,
Juices of those immortal plants that bloom
Upon Olympus, making us immortal?
Or teach me where that wondrous mandrake grows
Whose magic root, torn from the earth with groans,
At midnight hour, can scare the fiends away,
And make the mind prolific in its fancies!
I have the wish, but want the will, to act!
Souls of great men departed!  Ye whose words
Have come to light from the swift river of Time,
Like Roman swords found in the Tagus' bed,
Where is the strength to wield the arms ye bore?
From the barred visor of Antiquity
Reflected shines the eternal light of Truth,
As from a mirror!  All the means of action--
The shapeless masses, the materials--
Lie everywhere about us.  What we need
Is the celestial fire to change the flint
Into transparent crystal, bright and clear.
That fire is genius!  The rude peasant sits
At evening in his smoky cot, and draws
With charcoal uncouth figures on the wall.
The son of genius comes, foot-sore with travel,
And begs a shelter from the inclement night.
He takes the charcoal from the peasant's hand,
And, by the magic of his touch at once
Transfigured, all its hidden virtues shine,
And, in the eyes of the astonished clown,
It gleams a diamond!  Even thus transformed,
Rude popular traditions and old tales
Shine as immortal poems, at the touch
Of some poor, houseless, homeless, wandering bard,
Who had but a night's lodging for his pains.
But there are brighter dreams than those of Fame,
Which are the dreams of Love!  Out of the heart
Rises the bright ideal of these dreams,
As from some woodland fount a spirit rises
And sinks again into its silent deeps,
Ere the enamored knight can touch her robe!
'T is this ideal that the soul of man,
Like the enamored knight beside the fountain,
Waits for upon the margin of Life's stream;
Waits to behold her rise from the dark waters,
Clad in a mortal shape!  Alas! how many
Must wait in vain!  The stream flows evermore,
But from its silent deeps no spirit rises!
Yet I, born under a propitious star,
Have found the bright ideal of my dreams.
Yes! she is ever with me.  I can feel,
Here, as I sit at midnight and alone,
Her gentle breathing! on my breast can feel
The pressure of her head!  God's benison
Rest ever on it!  Close those beauteous eyes,
Sweet Sleep! and all the flowers that bloom at night
With balmy lips breathe in her ears my name!

(Gradually sinks asleep.)



ACT II.

SCENE I. -- PRECIOSA'S chamber.  Morning.  PRECIOSA and ANGELICA.

  Prec.  Why will you go so soon?  Stay yet awhile.
The poor too often turn away unheard
From hearts that shut against them with a sound
That will be heard in heaven.  Pray, tell me more
Of your adversities.  Keep nothing from me.
What is your landlord's name?

  Ang.        The Count of Lara.

  Prec.  The Count of Lara?  O, beware that man!
Mistrust his pity,--hold no parley with him!
And rather die an outcast in the streets
Than touch his gold.

  Ang.      You know him, then!

  Prec.              As much
As any woman may, and yet be pure.
As you would keep your name without a blemish,
Beware of him!

  Ang.      Alas! what can I do?
I cannot choose my friends.  Each word of kindness,
Come whence it may, is welcome to the poor.

  Prec.  Make me your friend.  A girl so young and fair
Should have no friends but those of her own sex.
What is your name?

  Ang.        Angelica.

  Prec.            That name
Was given you, that you might be an angel
To her who bore you!  When your infant smile
Made her home Paradise, you were her angel.
O, be an angel still!  She needs that smile.
So long as you are innocent, fear nothing.
No one can harm you!  I am a poor girl,
Whom chance has taken from the public streets.
I have no other shield than mine own virtue.
That is the charm which has protected me!
Amid a thousand perils, I have worn it
Here on my heart!  It is my guardian angel.

  Ang. (rising).  I thank you for this counsel, dearest lady.

  Prec.  Thank me by following it.

  Ang.           Indeed I will.

  Prec.  Pray, do not go.  I have much more to say.

  Ang.  My mother is alone.  I dare not leave her.

  Prec.  Some other time, then, when we meet again.
You must not go away with words alone.

(Gives her a purse.)

Take this.  Would it were more.

  Ang.        I thank you, lady.

  Prec.  No thanks.  To-morrow come to me again.
I dance to-night,--perhaps for the last time.
But what I gain, I promise shall be yours,
If that can save you from the Count of Lara.

  Ang.  O, my dear lady! how shall I be grateful
For so much kindness?

  Prec.      I  deserve no thanks,
Thank Heaven, not me.

  Ang.        Both Heaven and you.

  Prec.             Farewell.
Remember that you come again tomorrow.

  Ang.  I will.  And may the Blessed Virgin guard you,
And all good angels.    [Exit.

  Prec.    May they guard thee too,
And all the poor; for they have need of angels.
Now  bring me, dear Dolores, my basquina,
My richest maja dress,--my dancing dress,
And my most precious jewels!  Make me look
Fairer than night e'er saw me!  I've a prize
To win this day, worthy of Preciosa!

(Enter BELTRAN CRUZADO.)

  Cruz.  Ave Maria!

  Prec.       O God! my evil genius!
What seekest thou here to-day?

  Cruz.       Thyself,--my child.

  Prec.  What is thy will with me?

  Cruz.           Gold! gold!

  Prec.  I gave thee yesterday; I have no more.

  Cruz.  The gold of the Busne,--give me his gold!

  Prec.  I gave the last in charity to-day.

  Cruz.  That is a foolish lie.

  Prec.          It is the truth.

  Cruz.  Curses upon thee!  Thou art not my child!
Hast thou given gold away, and not to me?
Not to thy father?  To whom, then?

  Prec.               To one
Who needs it more.

  Cruz.  No one can need it more.

  Prec.  Thou art not poor.

  Cruz.  What, I, who lurk about
In dismal suburbs and unwholesome lanes
I, who am housed worse than the galley slave;
I, who am fed worse than the kennelled hound;
I, who am clothed in rags,--Beltran Cruzado,--
Not poor!

  Prec. Thou hast a stout heart and strong hands.
Thou canst supply thy wants; what wouldst thou more?

  Cruz.  The gold of the Busne! give me his gold!

  Prec.  Beltran Cruzado! hear me once for all.
I speak the truth.  So long as I had gold,
I gave it to thee freely, at all times,
Never denied thee; never had a wish
But to fulfil thine own.  Now go in peace!
Be merciful, be patient, and ere long
Thou shalt have more.

  Cruz.    And if I have it not,
Thou shalt no longer dwell here in rich chambers,
Wear silken dresses, feed on dainty food,
And live in idleness; but go with me,
Dance the Romalis in the public streets,
And wander wild again o'er field and fell;
For here we stay not long.

  Prec.     What! march again?

  Cruz.  Ay, with all speed. I hate the crowded town!
I cannot breathe shut up within its gates
Air,--I want air, and sunshine, and blue sky,
The feeling of the breeze upon my face,
The feeling of the turf beneath my feet,
And no walls but the far-off mountain-tops.
Then I am free and strong,--once more myself,
Beltran Cruzado, Count of the Cales!

  Prec.   God speed thee on thy march!--I cannot go.

  Cruz.  Remember who I am, and who thou art
Be silent and obey! Yet one thing more.
Bartolome Roman--

  Prec. (with emotion).  O, I beseech thee
If my obedience and blameless life,
If my humility and meek submission
In all things hitherto, can move in thee
One feeling of compassion; if thou art
Indeed my father, and canst trace in me
One look of her who bore me, or one tone
That doth remind thee of her, let it plead
In my behalf, who am a feeble girl,
Too feeble to resist, and do not force me
To wed that man!  I am afraid of him!
I do not love him! On my knees I beg thee
To use no violence, nor do in haste
What cannot be undone!

  Cruz.    O child, child, child!
Thou hast betrayed thy secret, as a bird
Betrays her nest, by striving to conceal it.
I will not leave thee here in the great city
To be a grandee's mistress.  Make thee ready
To go with us; and until then remember
A watchful eye is on thee.    [Exit.

  Prec.          Woe is me!
I have a strange misgiving in my heart!
But that one deed of charity I'll do,
Befall what may; they cannot take that from me.



SCENE II --  A room in the ARCHBISHOP'S Palace. The ARCHBISHOP
and a CARDINAL seated.

  Arch.  Knowing how near it touched the public morals,
And that our age is grown corrupt and rotten
By such excesses, we have sent to Rome,
Beseeching that his Holiness would aid
In curing the gross surfeit of the time,
By seasonable stop put here in Spain
To bull-fights and lewd dances on the stage.
All this you know.

  Card.      Know and approve.

  Arch.          And further,
That, by a mandate from his Holiness,
The first have been suppressed.

  Card.         I trust forever.
It was a cruel sport.

  Arch.     A barbarous pastime,
Disgraceful to the land that calls itself
Most Catholic and Christian.

  Card.         Yet the people
Murmur at this; and, if the public dances
Should be condemned upon too slight occasion,
Worse ills might follow than the ills we cure.
As Panem et Circenses was the cry
Among the Roman populace of old,
So Pan y Toros is the cry in Spain.
Hence I would act advisedly herein;
And therefore have induced your Grace to see
These national dances, ere we interdict them.

(Enter a Servant)

  Serv.  The dancing-girl, and with her the musicians
Your Grace was pleased to order, wait without.

  Arch.  Bid them come in.  Now shall your eyes behold
In what angelic, yet voluptuous shape
The Devil came to tempt Saint Anthony.

(Enter PRECIOSA, with a mantle thrown over her head.  She
advances slowly, in modest, half-timid attitude.)

  Card. (aside).  O, what a fair and ministering angel
Was lost to heaven when this sweet woman fell!

  Prec. (kneeling before the ARCHBISHOP).
I have obeyed the order of your Grace.
If I intrude upon your better hours,
I proffer this excuse, and here beseech
Your holy benediction.

  Arch.      May God bless thee,
And lead thee to a better life.  Arise.

  Card. (aside).  Her acts are modest, and her words discreet!
I did not look for this!  Come hither, child.
Is thy name Preciosa?

  Prec.       Thus I am called.

  Card.  That is a Gypsy name.  Who is thy father?

  Prec.  Beltran Cruzado, Count of the Cales.

  Arch.  I have a dim remembrance of that man:
He was a bold and reckless character,
A sun-burnt Ishmael!

  Card.      Dost thou remember
Thy earlier days?

  Prec.  Yes; by the Darro's side
My childhood passed.  I can remember still
The river, and the mountains capped with snow
The village, where, yet a little child,
I told the traveller's fortune in the street;
The smuggler's horse, the brigand and the shepherd;
The march across the moor; the halt at noon;
The red fire of the evening camp, that lighted
The forest where we slept; and, further back,
As in a dream or in some former life,
Gardens and palace walls.

  Arch.      'T is the Alhambra,
Under whose towers the Gypsy camp was pitched.
But the time wears; and we would see thee dance.

  Prec.  Your Grace shall be obeyed.

 (She lays aside her mantilla.  The music of the cachucha is
played, and the dance begins.  The ARCHBISHOP and the CARDINAL
look on with gravity and an occasional frown; then make signs to
each other; and, as the dance continues, become more and more
pleased and excited; and at length rise from their seats, throw
their caps in the air, and applaud vehemently as the scene
closes.)



SCENE III. -- The Prado.  A long avenue of trees leading to the
gate of Atocha.  On the right the dome and spires of a convent.
A fountain. Evening, DON CARLOS and HYPOLITO meeting.

  Don C.  Hola! good evening, Don Hypolito.

  Hyp.  And a good evening to my friend, Don Carlos.
Some lucky star has led my steps this way.
I was in search of you.

  Don. C.     Command me always.

  Hyp. Do you remember, in Quevedo's Dreams,
The miser, who, upon the Day of Judgment,
Asks if his money-bags would rise?

  Don C.              I do;
But what of that?

  Hyp.  I am that wretched man.

  Don C.  You mean to tell me yours have risen empty?

  Hyp.  And amen! said my Cid the Campeador.

  Don C.  Pray, how much need you?

  Hyp.       Some half-dozen ounces,
Which, with due interest--

  Don C. (giving his purse).  What, am I a Jew
To put my moneys out at usury?
Here is my purse.

  Hyp.  Thank you.  A pretty purse.
Made by the hand of some fair Madrilena;
Perhaps a keepsake.

  Don C.  No, 't is at your service.

  Hyp.  Thank you again.  Lie there, good Chrysostom,
And with thy golden mouth remind me often,
I am the debtor of my friend.

  Don C.         But tell me,
Come you to-day from Alcala?

  Hyp.           This moment.

  Don C.  And pray, how fares the brave Victorian?

  Hyp.  Indifferent well; that is to say, not well.
A damsel has ensnared him with the glances
Of her dark, roving eyes, as herdsmen catch
A steer of Andalusia with a lazo.
He is in love.

  Don C.  And is it faring ill
To be in love?

  Hyp.     In his case very ill.

  Don C.  Why so?

  Hyp.  For many reasons.  First and foremost,
Because he is in love with an ideal;
A creature of his own imagination;
A child of air; an echo of his heart;
And, like a lily on a river floating,
She floats upon the river of his thoughts!

  Don C.  A common thing with poets.  But who is
This floating lily?  For, in fine, some woman,
Some living woman,--not a mere ideal,--
Must wear the outward semblance of his thought.
Who is it?  Tell me.

  Hyp.       Well, it is a woman!
But, look you, from the coffer of his heart
He brings forth precious jewels to adorn her,
As pious priests adorn some favorite saint
With gems and gold, until at length she gleams
One blaze of glory.  Without these, you know,
And the priest's benediction, 't is a doll.

  Don C.  Well, well! who is this doll?

  Hyp.       Why, who do you think?

  Don C.  His cousin Violante.

  Hyp.           Guess again.
To ease his laboring heart, in the last storm
He threw her overboard, with all her ingots.

  Don C.  I cannot guess; so tell me who it is.

  Hyp.  Not I.

  Don. C.   Why not?

  Hyp. (mysteriously).  Why?  Because Mari Franca
Was married four leagues out of Salamanca!

  Don C.  Jesting aside, who is it?

  Hyp.                 Preciosa.

  Don C.  Impossible!  The Count of Lara tells me
She is not virtuous.

   Hyp.       Did I say she was?
The Roman Emperor Claudius had a wife
Whose name was Messalina, as I think;
Valeria Messalina was her name.
But hist! I see him yonder through the trees,
Walking as in a dream.

  Don C.     He comes this way.

  Hyp.  It has been truly said by some wise man,
That money, grief, and love cannot be hidden.

(Enter VICTORIAN in front.)

  Vict.  Where'er thy step has passed is holy ground!
These groves are sacred!  I behold thee walking
Under these shadowy trees, where we have walked
At evening, and I feel thy presence now;
Feel that the place has taken a charm from thee,
And is forever hallowed.

  Hyp.          Mark him well!
See how he strides away with lordly air,
Like that odd guest of stone, that grim Commander
Who comes to sup with Juan in the play.

  Don C.  What ho!  Victorian!

  Hyp.         Wilt thou sup with us?

  Vict.  Hola! amigos!  Faith, I did not see you.
How fares Don Carlos?

  Don C.       At your service ever.

  Vict.  How is that young and green-eyed Gaditana
That you both wot of?

  Don C.   Ay, soft, emerald eyes!
She has gone back to Cadiz.

  Hyp.              Ay de mi!

  Vict.  You are much to blame for letting her go back.
A pretty girl; and in her tender eyes
Just that soft shade of green we sometimes see
In evening skies.

  Hyp.  But, speaking of green eyes,
Are thine green?

  Vict.     Not a whit.  Why so?

  Hyp.               I think
The slightest shade of green would be becoming,
For thou art jealous.

  Vid.            No, I am not jealous.

  Hyp.  Thou shouldst be.

  Vict.                  Why?

  Hyp.    Because thou art in love.
And they who are in love are always jealous.
Therefore thou shouldst be.


  Vict.       Marry, is that all?
Farewell; I am in haste.  Farewell, Don Carlos.
Thou sayest I should be jealous?


  Hyp.            Ay, in truth
I fear there is reason.  Be upon thy guard.
I hear it whispered that the Count of Lara
Lays siege to the same citadel.

  Vict.              Indeed!
Then he will have his labor for his pains.

  Hyp.  He does not think so, and Don Carlos tells me
He boasts of his success.

  Vict.   How's this, Don Carlos?

  Don. C.  Some hints of it I heard from his own lips.
He spoke but lightly of the lady's virtue,
As a gay man might speak.

  Vict.     Death and damnation!
I'll cut his lying tongue out of his mouth,
And throw it to my dog!  But no, no, no!
This cannot be.  You jest, indeed you jest.
Trifle with me no more.  For otherwise
We are no longer friends.  And so, fare well!
                   [Exit.

  Hyp.  Now what a coil is here!  The Avenging Child
Hunting the traitor Quadros to his death,
And the Moor Calaynos, when he rode
To Paris for the ears of Oliver,
Were nothing to him!  O hot-headed youth!
But come; we will not follow.  Let us join
The crowd that pours into the Prado.  There
We shall find merrier company; I see
The Marialonzos and the Almavivas,
And fifty fans, that beckon me already.
                    [Exeunt.



SCENE IV. -- PRECIOSA'S chamber.  She is sitting, with a book in
her hand, near a table, on which are flowers.  A bird singing in
its cage. The COUNT OF LARA enters behind unperceived.

  Prec. (reads).
     All are sleeping, weary heart!
     Thou, thou only sleepless art!

Heigho! I wish Victorian were here.
I know not what it is makes me so restless!

(The bird sings.)

Thou little prisoner with thy motley coat,
That from thy vaulted, wiry dungeon singest,
Like thee I am a captive, and, like thee,
I have a gentle jailer.  Lack-a-day!

     All are sleeping, weary heart!
     Thou, thou only sleepless art!
     All this throbbing, all this aching,
     Evermore shall keep thee waking,
     For a heart in sorrow breaking
     Thinketh ever of its smart!

Thou speakest truly, poet! and methinks
More hearts are breaking in this world of ours
Than one would say.  In distant villages
And solitudes remote, where winds have wafted
The barbed seeds of love, or birds of passage
Scattered them in their flight, do they take root,
And grow in silence, and in silence perish.
Who hears the falling of the forest leaf?
Or who takes note of every flower that dies?
Heigho! I wish Victorian would come.
Dolores!

(Turns to lay down her boot and perceives the COUNT.)

       Ha!

  Lara.      Senora, pardon me.

  Prec.  How's this?  Dolores!

  Lara.           Pardon me--

  Prec.               Dolores!

  Lara.  Be not alarmed; I found no one in waiting.
If I have been too bold--

  Prec. (turning her back upon him).  You are too bold!
Retire! retire, and leave me!

  Lara.         My dear lady,
First hear me!  I beseech you, let me speak!
'T is for your good I come.

  Prec. (turning toward him with indignation).  Begone! begone!
You are the Count of Lara, but your deeds
Would make the statues of your ancestors
Blush on their tombs!  Is it Castilian honor,
Is it Castilian pride, to steal in here
Upon a friendless girl, to do her wrong?
O shame! shame! shame! that you, a nobleman,
Should be so little noble in your thoughts
As to send jewels here to win my love,
And think to buy my honor with your gold!
I have no words to tell you how I scorn you!
Begone!  The sight of you is hateful to me!
Begone, I say!

  Lara.  Be calm; I will not harm you.

  Prec.  Because you dare not.

  Lara.             I dare anything!
Therefore beware!  You are deceived in me.
In this false world, we do not always know
Who are our friends and who our enemies.
We all have enemies, and all need friends.
Even you, fair Preciosa, here at court
Have foes, who seek to wrong you.

  Prec.              If to this
I owe the honor of the present visit,
You might have spared the coming.  Raving spoken,
Once more I beg you, leave me to myself.

  Lara.  I thought it but a friendly part to tell you
What strange reports are current here in town.
For my own self, I do not credit them;
But there are many who, not knowing you,
Will lend a readier ear.

  Prec.       There was no need
That you should take upon yourself the duty
Of telling me these tales.

  Lara.       Malicious tongues
Are ever busy with your name.

  Prec.              Alas!
I've no protectors.  I am a poor girl,
Exposed to insults and unfeeling jests.
They wound me, yet I cannot shield myself.
I give no cause for these reports.  I live
Retired; am visited by none.

  Lara.             By none?
O, then, indeed, you are much wronged!

  Prec.        How mean you?

  Lara.  Nay, nay; I will not wound your gentle soul
By the report of idle tales.

  Prec.           Speak out!
What are these idle tales? You need not spare me.

  Lara.  I will deal frankly with you.  Pardon me
This window, as I think, looks toward the street,
And this into the Prado, does it not?
In yon high house, beyond the garden wall,--
You see the roof there just above the trees,--
There lives a friend, who told me yesterday,
That on a certain night,--be not offended
If I too plainly speak,--he saw a man
Climb to your chamber window.  You are silent!
I would not blame you, being young and fair--

(He tries to embrace her. She starts back, and draws a dagger
from her bosom.)

  Prec.  Beware! beware!  I am a Gypsy girl!
Lay not your hand upon me.  One step nearer
And I will strike!

  Lara.  Pray you, put up that dagger.
Fear not.

  Prec. I do not fear.  I have a heart
In whose strength I can trust.

  Lara.          Listen to me
I come here as your friend,--I am your friend,--
And by a single word can put a stop
To all those idle tales, and make your name
Spotless as lilies are.  Here on my knees,
Fair Preciosa! on my knees I swear,
I love you even to madness, and that love
Has driven me to break the rules of custom,
And force myself unasked into your presence.

(VICTORIAN enters behind.)

  Prec.  Rise, Count of Lara!  That is not the place
For such as you are.  It becomes you not
To kneel before me.  I am strangely moved
To see one of your rank thus low and humbled;
For your sake I will put aside all anger,
All unkind feeling, all dislike, and speak
In gentleness, as most becomes a woman,
And as my heart now prompts me.  I no more
Will hate you, for all hate is painful to me.
But if, without offending modesty
And that reserve which is a woman's glory,
I may speak freely, I will teach my heart
To love you.

  Lara.  O sweet angel!

  Prec.           Ay, in truth,
Far better than you love yourself or me.

  Lara.  Give me some sign of this,--the slightest token.
Let me but kiss your hand!

  Prec.     Nay, come no nearer.
The words I utter are its sign and token.
Misunderstand me not!  Be not deceived!
The love wherewith I love you is not such
As you would offer me.  For you come here
To take from me the only thing I have,
My honor.  You are wealthy, you have friends
And kindred, and a thousand pleasant hopes
That fill your heart with happiness; but I
Am poor, and friendless, having but one treasure,
And you would take that from me, and for what?
To flatter your own vanity, and make me
What you would most despise.  O sir, such love,
That seeks to harm me, cannot be true love.
Indeed it cannot.  But my love for you
Is of a different kind.  It seeks your good.
It is a holier feeling.  It rebukes
Your earthly passion, your unchaste desires,
And bids you look into your heart, and see
How you do wrong that better nature in you,
And grieve your soul with sin.

  Lara.         I swear to you,
I would not harm you; I would only love you.
I would not take your honor, but restore it,
And in return I ask but some slight mark
Of your affection.  If indeed you love me,
As you confess you do, O let me thus
With this embrace--

  Vict. (rushing forward).  Hold! hold!  This is too much.
What means this outrage?

  Lara.  First, what right have you
To question thus a nobleman of Spain?

  Vict.  I too am noble, and you are no more!
Out of my sight!

  Lara.       Are you the master here?

  Vict.  Ay, here and elsewhere, when the wrong of others
Gives me the right!

  Prec. (to LARA).  Go! I beseech you, go!

  Vict.  I shall have business with you, Count, anon!

  Lara.  You cannot come too soon!
                     [Exit.

  Prec.           Victorian!
O, we have been betrayed!

  Vict.      Ha! ha! betrayed!
'T is I have been betrayed, not we!--not we!

  Prec.  Dost thou imagine--

  Vict.      I imagine nothing;
I see how 't is thou whilest the time away
When I am gone!

  Prec.  O speak not in that tone!
It wounds me deeply.

  Vict.  'T was not meant to flatter.

  Prec.  Too well thou knowest the presence of that man
Is hateful to me!

  Vict.     Yet I saw thee stand
And listen to him, when he told his love.

  Prec.  I did not heed his words.

  Vict.       Indeed thou didst,
And answeredst them with love.

  Prec.       Hadst thou heard all--

  Vict.  I heard enough.

  Prec.      Be not so angry with me.

  Vict.  I am not angry; I am very calm.

  Prec.  If thou wilt let me speak--

  Vict.       Nay, say no more.
I know too much already.  Thou art false!
I do not like these Gypsy marriages!
Where is the ring I gave thee?

  Prec.         In my casket.

  Vict.  There let it rest!  I would not have thee wear it:
I thought thee spotless, and thou art polluted!

  Prec.  I call the Heavens to witness--

  Vict.         Nay, nay, nay!
Take not the name of Heaven upon thy lips!
They are forsworn!

  Prec.  Victorian! dear Victorian!

  Vict.  I gave up all for thee; myself, my fame,
My hopes of fortune, ay, my very soul!
And thou hast been my ruin!  Now, go on!
Laugh at my folly with thy paramour,
And, sitting on the Count of Lara's knee,
Say what a poor, fond fool Victorian was!

(He casts her from him and rushes out.)

  Prec.  And this from thee!

(Scene closes.)



SCENE V. -- The COUNT OF LARA'S rooms.  Enter the COUNT.

  Lara.  There's nothing in this world so sweet as love,
And next to love the sweetest thing is hate!
I've learned to hate, and therefore am revenged.
A silly girl to play the prude with me!
The fire that I have kindled--

(Enter FRANCISCO.)

                Well, Francisco,
What tidings from Don Juan?

  Fran.         Good, my lord;
He will be present.

  Lara.     And the Duke of Lermos?

  Fran.  Was not at home.

  Lara.      How with the rest?

  Fran.            I've found
The men you wanted.  They will all be there,
And at the given signal raise a whirlwind
Of such discordant noises, that the dance
Must cease for lack of music.

  Lara.          Bravely done.
Ah! little dost thou dream, sweet Preciosa,
What lies in wait for thee.  Sleep shall not close
Thine eyes this night!  Give me my cloak and sword. [Exeunt.



SCENE VI. -- A retired spot beyond the city gates.  Enter
VICTORIAN and HYPOLITO.

   Vict.  O shame! O shame!  Why do I walk abroad
By daylight, when the very sunshine mocks me,
And voices, and familiar sights and sounds
Cry, "Hide thyself!"  O what a thin partition
Doth shut out from the curious world the knowledge
Of evil deeds that have been done in darkness!
Disgrace has many tongues.  My fears are windows,
Through which all eyes seem gazing.  Every face
Expresses some suspicion of my shame,
And in derision seems to smile at me!

  Hyp.  Did I not caution thee?  Did I not tell thee
I was but half persuaded of her virtue?

  Vict.  And yet, Hypolito, we may be wrong,
We may be over-hasty in condemning!
The Count of Lara is a cursed villain.

  Hyp.  And therefore is she cursed, loving him.

  Vid.  She does not love him! 'T is for gold! for gold!

  Hyp.  Ay, but remember, in the public streets
He shows a golden ring the Gypsy gave him,
A serpent with a ruby in its mouth.

  Vict.  She had that ring from me!  God! she is false!
But I will be revenged!  The hour is passed.
Where stays the coward?

  Hyp.     Nay, he is no coward;
A villain, if thou wilt, but not a coward.
I've seen him play with swords; it is his pastime.
And therefore be not over-confident,
He'll task thy skill anon.  Look, here he comes.

(Enter LARA followed by FRNANCISCO)

  Lara.  Good evening, gentlemen.

  Hyp.       Good evening, Count.

  Lara.  I trust I have not kept you long in waiting.

  Vict.  Not long, and yet too long.  Are you prepared?

  Lara.  I am.

  Hyp.      It grieves me much to see this quarrel
Between you, gentlemen.  Is there no way
Left open to accord this difference,
But you must make one with your swords?

  Vict.            No! none!
I do entreat thee, dear Hypolito,
Stand not between me an my foe.  Too long
Our tongues have spoken.  Let these tongues of steel
End our debate.  Upon your guard, Sir Count.

(They fight. VICTORIAN disarms the COUNT.)

Your life is mine; and what shall now withhold me
From sending your vile soul to its account?

  Lara.  Strike! strike!

  Vict.    You are disarmed.  I will not kill you.
I will not murder you.  Take up your sword.

(FRANCISCO hands the COUNT his sword, and HYPOLITO interposes.)

  Hyp.  Enough!  Let it end here!  The Count of Lara
Has shown himself a brave man, and Victorian
A generous one, as ever.  Now be friends.
Put up your swords; for, to speak frankly to you,
Your cause of quarrel is too slight a thing
To move you to extremes.

  Lara.          I am content,
I sought no quarrel.  A few hasty words,
Spoken in the heat of blood, have led to this.

  Vict.  Nay, something more than that.

  Lara.       I understand you.
Therein I did not mean to cross your path.
To me the door stood open, as to others.
But, had I known the girl belonged to you,
Never would I have sought to win her from you.
The truth stands now revealed; she has been false
To both of us.

  Vict.       Ay, false as hell itself!

  Lara.  In truth, I did not seek her; she sought me;
And told me how to win her, telling me
The hours when she was oftenest left alone.

  Vict.  Say, can you prove this to me?  O, pluck out
These awful doubts, that goad me into madness!
Let me know all! all! all!

  Lara.      You shall know all.
Here is my page, who was the messenger
Between us.  Question him.  Was it not so,
Francisco?

  Fran.    Ay, my lord.

  Lara.         If further proof
Is needful, I have here a ring she gave me.

  Vict. Pray let me see that ring!  It is the same!

(Throws it upon the ground, and tramples upon it.)

Thus may she perish who once wore that ring!
Thus do I spurn her from me; do thus trample
Her memory in the dust!  O Count of Lara,
We both have been abused, been much abused!
I thank you for your courtesy and frankness.
Though, like the surgeon's hand, yours gave me pain,
Yet it has cured my blindness, and I thank you.
I now can see the folly I have done,
Though 't is, alas! too late.  So fare you well!
To-night I leave this hateful town forever.
Regard me as your friend. Once more farewell!

  Hyp.  Farewell, Sir Count.

   [Exeunt VICTORIAN and HYPOLITO.

  Lara.  Farewell! farewell! farewell!
Thus have I cleared the field of my worst foe!
I have none else to fear; the fight is done,
The citadel is stormed, the victory won!

[Exit with FRANCISCO.



SCENE VII. -- A lane in the suburbs.  Night.  Enter CRUZADO and
BARTOLOME.

  Cruz.  And so, Bartolome, the expedition failed.  But where
wast thou for the most part?

  Bart.  In the Guadarrama mountains, near San Ildefonso.

  Cruz.  And thou bringest nothing back with thee?  Didst thou
rob no one?

  Bart.  There was no one to rob, save a party of students from
Segovia, who looked as if they would rob us; and a jolly little
friar, who had nothing in his pockets but a missal and a loaf of
bread.

  Cruz.  Pray, then, what brings thee back to Madrid?

  Bart.  First tell me what keeps thee here?

  Cruz.  Preciosa.

  Bart.  And she brings me back.  Hast thou forgotten thy
promise?

  Cruz.  The two years are not passed yet.  Wait patiently.  The
girl shall be thine.

  Bart.  I hear she has a Busne lover.

  Cruz.  That is nothing.

  Bart.  I do not like it.  I hate him,--the son of a Busne
harlot.  He goes in and out, and speaks with her alone, and I
must stand aside, and wait his pleasure.

  Cruz.  Be patient, I say.  Thou shalt have thy revenge.  When
the time comes, thou shalt waylay him.

  Bart.  Meanwhile, show me her house.

  Cruz.  Come this way.  But thou wilt not find her.  She dances
at the play to-night.

  Bart.  No matter.  Show me the house.
                    [Exeunt.



SCENE VIII. -- The Theatre.  The orchestra plays the cachucha.
Sound of castanets behind the scenes.  The curtain rises, and
discovers PRECIOSA in the attitude of commencing the dance.  The
cachucha.  Tumult; hisses; cries of "Brava!" and "Afuera!"  She
falters and pauses.  The music stops.  General confusion.
PRECIOSA faints.



SCENE IX. -- The COUNT OF LARA'S chambers.  LARA and his friends
at supper.

  Lara.  So, Caballeros, once more many thanks!
You have stood by me bravely in this matter.
Pray fill your glasses.

  Don J.  Did you mark, Don Luis,
How pale she looked, when first the noise began,
And then stood still, with her large eyes dilated!
Her nostrils spread! her lips apart! Her bosom
Tumultuous as the sea!

  Don L.        I pitied her.

  Lara.  Her pride is humbled; and this very night
I mean to visit her.

  Don J.      Will you serenade her?

  Lara.  No music! no more music!

  Don L.       Why not music?
It softens many hearts.

  Lara.        Not in the humor
She now is in.  Music would madden her.

  Don J.  Try golden cymbals.

   Don L.      Yes, try Don Dinero;
A mighty wooer is your Don Dinero.

  Lara.  To tell the truth, then, I have bribed her maid.
But, Caballeros, you dislike this wine.
A bumper and away; for the night wears.
A health to Preciosa.

(They rise and drink.)

  All.          Preciosa.

  Lara.  (holding up his glass).
Thou bright and flaming minister of Love!
Thou wonderful magician! who hast stolen
My secret from me, and mid sighs of passion
Caught from my lips, with red and fiery tongue,
Her precious name!  O nevermore henceforth
Shall mortal lips press thine; and nevermore
A mortal name be whispered in thine ear.
Go! keep my secret!

(Drinks and dashes the goblet down.)

  Don J.      Ite! missa est!

(Scene closes.)



SCENE X. -- Street and garden wall.  Night.  Enter CRUZADO and
BARTOLOME.

  Cruz.  This is the garden wall, and above it, yonder, is her
house.  The window in which thou seest the light is her window.
But we will not go in now.

  Bart.  Why not?

  Cruz.  Because she is not at home.

  Bart.  No matter; we can wait.  But how is this?  The gate is
bolted.  (Sound of guitars and voices in a neighboring street.)
Hark!  There comes her lover with his infernal serenade!  Hark!

SONG.

Good night!  Good night, beloved!
  I come to watch o'er thee!
To be near thee,--to be near thee,
  Alone is peace for me.

Thine eyes are stars of morning,
  Thy lips are crimson flowers!
Good night!  Good night beloved,
  While I count the weary hours.

  Cruz.  They are not coming this way.

  Bart.  Wait, they begin again.

SONG (coming nearer).

Ah! thou moon that shinest
  Argent-clear above!
All night long enlighten
  My sweet lady-love!
  Moon that shinest,
All night long enlighten!

  Bart.  Woe be to him, if he comes this way!

  Cruz.  Be quiet, they are passing down the street.

SONG (dying away).

The nuns in the cloister
  Sang to each other;
For so many sisters
  Is there not one brother!
Ay, for the partridge, mother!
The cat has run away with the partridge!
  Puss! puss! puss!

  Bart.  Follow that! follow that!
Come with me. Puss! puss!

(Exeunt.  On the opposite side enter the COUNT OF LARA and
gentlemen, with FRANCISCO.)

  Lara.  The gate is fast. Over the wall, Francisco,
And draw the bolt.  There, so, and so, and over.
Now, gentlemen, come in, and help me scale
Yon balcony.  How now?  Her light still burns.
Move warily.  Make fast the gate, Francisco.

(Exeunt.  Re-enter CRUZADO and BARTOLOME.)

  Bart.  They went in at the gate.  Hark! I hear them in the
garden. (Tries the gate.)  Bolted again! Vive Cristo! Follow me
over the wall.

(They climb the wall.)



SCENE XI. -- PRECIOSA'S bedchamber.  Midnight. She is sleeping in
an armchair, in an undress.  DOLORES watching her.

  Dol.  She sleeps at last!

(Opens the window, and listens.)

           All silent in the street,
And in the garden.  Hark!

  Prec. (in her sleep).  I must go hence!
Give me my cloak!

  Dol.  He comes!  I hear his footsteps.

  Prec.  Go tell them that I cannot dance to-night;
I am too ill!  Look at me!  See the fever
That burns upon my cheek!  I must go hence.
I am too weak to dance.

(Signal from the garden.)

  Dol. (from the window).  Who's there?

  Voice (from below).     A friend.

  Dol.  I will undo the door.  Wait till I come.

  Prec.  I must go hence.  I pray you do not harm me!
Shame! shame! to treat a feeble woman thus!
Be you but kind, I will do all things for you.
I'm ready now,--give me my castanets.
Where is Victorian?  Oh, those hateful lamps!
They glare upon me like an evil eye.
I cannot stay.  Hark! how they mock at me!
They hiss at me like serpents!  Save me! save me!

(She wakes.)

How late is it, Dolores?

  Dol.             It is midnight.

  Prec.  We must be patient. Smooth this pillow for me.

(She sleeps again.  Noise from the garden, and voices.)

  Voice.  Muera!

  Another Voice.  O villains! villains!

  Lara.          So! have at you!

  Voice.  Take that!

  Lara.          O, I am wounded!

  Dol. (shutting the window).  Jesu Maria!



ACT III.

SCENE I. -- A cross-road through a wood.  In the background a
distant village spire.  VICTORIAN and HYPOLITO, as travelling
students, with guitars, sitting under the trees.  HYPOLITO plays
and sings.

SONG.

     Ah, Love!
Perjured, false, treacherous Love!
     Enemy
Of all that mankind may not rue!
     Most untrue
To him who keeps most faith with thee.
     Woe is me!
The falcon has the eyes of the dove.
     Ah, Love!
Perjured, false, treacherous Love!

  Vict.  Yes, Love is ever busy with his shuttle,
Is ever weaving into life's dull warp
Bright, gorgeous flowers and scenes Arcadian;
Hanging our gloomy prison-house about
With tapestries, that make its walls dilate
In never-ending vistas of delight.

  Hyp.  Thinking to walk in those Arcadian pastures,
Thou hast run thy noble head against the wall.

SONG (continued).

     Thy deceits
Give us clearly to comprehend,
     Whither tend
All thy pleasures, all thy sweets!
     They are cheats,
Thorns below and flowers above.
     Ah, Love!
Perjured, false, treacherous Love!

  Vict.  A very pretty song.  I thank thee for it.

  Hyp.  It suits thy case.

  Vict.          Indeed, I think it does.
What wise man wrote it?

  Hyp.              Lopez Maldonado.

  Vict.  In truth, a pretty song.

  Hyp.           With much truth in it.
I hope thou wilt profit by it; and in earnest
Try to forget this lady of thy love.

  Vict.  I will forget her!  All dear recollections
Pressed in my heart, like flowers within a book,
Shall be torn out, and scattered to the winds!
I will forget her!  But perhaps hereafter,
When she shall learn how heartless is the world,
A voice within her will repeat my name,
And she will say, "He was indeed my friend!"
O, would I were a soldier, not a scholar,
That the loud march, the deafening beat of drums,
The shattering blast of the brass-throated trumpet,
The din of arms, the onslaught and the storm,
And a swift death, might make me deaf forever
To the upbraidings of this foolish heart!

  Hyp.  Then let that foolish heart upbraid no more!
To conquer love, one need but will to conquer.

  Vict.  Yet, good Hypolito, it is in vain
I throw into Oblivion's sea the sword
That pierces me; for, like Excalibar,
With gemmed and flashing hilt, it will not sink.
There rises from below a hand that grasp it,
And waves it in the air; and wailing voices
Are heard along the shore.

  Hyp.               And yet at last
Down sank Excalibar to rise no more.
This is not well.  In truth, it vexes me.
Instead of whistling to the steeds of Time,
To make them jog on merrily with life's burden,
Like a dead weight thou hangest on the wheels.
Thou art too young, too full of lusty health
To talk of dying.

  Vict.           Yet I fain would die!
To go through life, unloving and unloved;
To feel that thirst and hunger of the soul
We cannot still; that longing, that wild impulse,
And struggle after something we have not
And cannot have; the effort to be strong
And, like the Spartan boy, to smile, and smile,
While secret wounds do bleed beneath our cloaks
All this the dead feel not,--the dead alone!
Would I were with them!

  Hyp.            We shall all be soon.

  Vict.  It cannot be too soon; for I am weary
Of the bewildering masquerade of Life,
Where strangers walk as friends, and friends as strangers;
Where whispers overheard betray false hearts;
And through the mazes of the crowd we chase
Some form of loveliness, that smiles, and beckons,
And cheats us with fair words, only to leave us
A mockery and a jest; maddened,--confused,--
Not knowing friend from foe.

  Hyp.              Why seek to know?
Enjoy the merry shrove-tide of thy youth!
Take each fair mask for what it gives itself,
Nor strive to look beneath it.

  Vict.                         I confess,
That were the wiser part.  But Hope no longer
Comforts my soul.  I am a wretched man,
Much like a poor and shipwrecked mariner,
Who, struggling to climb up into the boat,
Has both his bruised and bleeding hands cut off,
And sinks again into the weltering sea,
Helpless and hopeless!

  Hyp.        Yet thou shalt not perish.
The strength of thine own arm is thy salvation.
Above thy head, through rifted clouds, there shines
A glorious star.  Be patient.  Trust thy star!

(Sound of a village belt in the distance.)

  Vict.  Ave Maria!  I hear the sacristan
Ringing the chimes from yonder village belfry!
A solemn sound, that echoes far and wide
Over the red roofs of the cottages,
And bids the laboring hind a-field, the shepherd,
Guarding his flock, the lonely muleteer,
And all the crowd in village streets, stand still,
And breathe a prayer unto the blessed Virgin!

  Hyp.  Amen! amen!  Not half a league from hence
The village lies.

  Vict.       This path will lead us to it,
Over the wheat-fields, where the shadows sail
Across the running sea, now green, now blue,
And, like an idle mariner on the main,
Whistles the quail.  Come, let us hasten on.
                                    [Exeunt.



SCENE II. -- Public square in the village of Guadarrama.  The Ave
Maria still tolling.  A crowd of villagers, with their hats in
their hands, as if in prayer.  In front, a group of Gypsies.  The
bell rings a merrier peal.  A Gypsy dance.  Enter PANCHO,
followed by PEDRO CRESPO.

  Pancho.  Make room, ye vagabonds and Gypsy thieves!
Make room for the Alcalde and for me!

  Pedro C.  Keep silence all!  I have an edict here
From our most gracious lord, the King of Spain,
Jerusalem, and the Canary Islands,
Which I shall publish in the market-place.
Open your ears and listen!

(Enter the PADRE CURA at the door of his cottage.)

                           Padre Cura,
Good day! and, pray you, hear this edict read.

  Padre C.  Good day, and God be with you!  Pray, what is it?

  Pedro C.  An act of banishment against the Gypsies!

(Agitation and murmurs in the crowd.)

  Pancho.  Silence!

  Pedro C. (reads).  "I hereby order and command,
That the Egyptian an Chaldean strangers,
Known by the name of Gypsies, shall henceforth
Be banished from the realm, as vagabonds
And beggars; and if, after seventy days,
Any be found within our kingdom's bounds,
They shall receive a hundred lashes each;
The second time, shall have their ears cut off;
The third, be slaves for life to him who takes them,
Or burnt as heretics.  Signed, I, the King."
Vile miscreants and creatures unbaptized!
You hear the law!  Obey and disappear!

  Pancho.  And if in seventy days you are not gone,
Dead or alive I make you all my slaves.

(The Gypsies go out in confusion, showing signs of fear and
discontent.  PANCHO follows.)

  Padre C.  A righteous law!  A very righteous law!
Pray you, sit down.

Pedro C.          I thank you heartily.

(They seat themselves on a bench at the PADRE CURAS door.  Sound
of guitars heard at a distance, approaching during the dialogue
which follows.)

A very righteous judgment, as you say.
Now tell me, Padre Cura,--you know all things,
How came these Gypsies into Spain?

  Padre C.           Why, look you;
They came with Hercules from Palestine,
And hence are thieves and vagrants, Sir Alcalde,
As the Simoniacs from Simon Magus,
And, look you, as Fray Jayme Bleda says,
There are a hundred marks to prove a Moor
Is not a Christian, so 't is with the Gypsies.
They never marry, never go to mass,
Never baptize their children, nor keep Lent,
Nor see the inside of a church,--nor--nor--

  Pedro C.  Good reasons, good, substantial reasons all!
No matter for the other ninety-five.
They should be burnt, I see it plain enough,
They should be bunt.

(Enter VICTORIAN and HYPOLITO playing.)

  Padre C.  And pray, whom have we here?

  Pedro C.  More vagrants!  By Saint Lazarus, more vagrants!

  Hyp.  Good evening, gentlemen!  Is this Guadarrama?

  Padre C.  Yes, Guadarrama, and good evening to you.

  Hyp.  We seek the Padre Cura of the village;
And, judging from your dress and reverend mien,
You must be he.

  Padre C.     I am.  Pray, what's your pleasure?

  Hyp.  We are poor students, traveling in vacation.
You know this mark?

(Touching the wooden spoon in his hat-band.

  Padre C. (joyfully).  Ay, know it, and have worn it.

  Pedro C.  (aside).  Soup-eaters! by the mass!  The worst of vagrants!
And there's no law against them.  Sir, your servant.
                                  [Exit.

  Padre C.  Your servant, Pedro Crespo.

  Hyp.                     Padre Cura,
Front the first moment I beheld your face,
I said within myself, "This is the man!"
There is a certain something in your looks,
A certain scholar-like and studious something,--
You understand,--which cannot be mistaken;
Which marks you as a very learned man,
In fine, as one of us.

  Vict. (aside).       What impudence!

  Hyp.  As we approached, I said to my companion,
"That is the Padre Cura; mark my words!"
Meaning your Grace.  "The other man," said I,
Who sits so awkwardly upon the bench,
Must be the sacristan."

  Padre C.             Ah! said you so?
Why, that was Pedro Crespo, the alcalde!

  Hyp.  Indeed! you much astonish me!  His air
Was not so full of dignity and grace
As an alcalde's should be.

  Padre C.                 That is true.
He's out of humor with some vagrant Gypsies,
Who have their camp here in the neighborhood.
There's nothing so undignified as anger.

  Hyp.  The Padre Cura will excuse our boldness,
If, from his well-known hospitality,
We crave a lodging for the night.

  Padre C.                  I pray you!
You do me honor!  I am but too happy
To have such guests beneath my humble roof.
It is not often that I have occasion
To speak with scholars; and Emollit mores,
Nec sinit esse feros, Cicero says.

  Hyp.  'T is Ovid, is it not?

  Padre C.                   No, Cicero.

  Hyp.  Your Grace is right.  You are the better scholar.
Now what a dunce was I to think it Ovid!
But hang me if it is not! (Aside.)

  Padre C.               Pass this way.
He was a very great man, was Cicero!
Pray you, go in, go in! no ceremony.
                              [Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- A room in the PADRE CURA'S  house.  Enter the PADRE
and HYPOLITO.

  Padre C.  So then, Senor, you come from Alcala.
I am glad to hear it.  It was there I studied.

  Hyp.  And left behind an honored name, no doubt.
How may I call your Grace?

  Padre C.                 Geronimo
De Santillana, at your Honor's service.

  Hyp.  Descended from the Marquis Santillana?
From the distinguished poet?

  Padre C.          From the Marquis,
Not from the poet.

  Hyp.        Why, they were the same.
Let me embrace you!  O some lucky star
Has brought me hither!  Yet once more!--once more!
Your name is ever green in Alcala,
And our professor, when we are unruly,
Will shake his hoary head, and say, "Alas!
It was not so in Santillana's time!"

  Padre C.  I did not think my name remembered there.

  Hyp.  More than remembered; it is idolized.

  Padre C.  Of what professor speak you?

  Hyp.  Timoneda.

  Padre C. I don't remember any Timoneda.

  Hyp.  A grave and sombre man, whose beetling brow
O'erhangs the rushing current of his speech
As rocks o'er rivers hang.  Have you forgotten?

  Padre C.  Indeed, I have.  O, those were pleasant days,
Those college days!  I ne'er shall see the like!
I had not buried then so many hopes!
I had not buried then so many friends!
I've turned my back on what was then before me;
And the bright faces of my young companions
Are wrinkled like my own, or are no more.
Do you remember Cueva?

  Hyp.               Cueva?  Cueva?

  Padre C.  Fool that I am!  He was before your time.
You're a mere boy, and I am an old man.

  Hyp.  I should not like to try my strength with you.

  Padre C.  Well, well.  But I forget; you must be hungry.
Martina! ho! Martina!  'T is my niece.

(Enter MARTINA.)

  Hyp.  You may be proud of such a niece as that.
I wish I had a niece.  Emollit mores.
    (Aside.)
He was a very great man, was Cicero!
Your servant, fair Martina.

  Mart.                     Servant, sir.

  Padre C.  This gentleman is hungry.  See thou to it.
Let us have supper.

  Mart.           'T will be ready soon.

  Padre C.  And bring a bottle of my Val-de-Penas
Out of the cellar.  Stay; I'll go myself.
Pray you. Senor, excuse me.      [Exit.

  Hyp.                 Hist! Martina!
One word with you.  Bless me I what handsome eyes!
To-day there have been Gypsies in the village.
Is it not so?

  Mart.  There have been Gypsies here.

  Hyp.  Yes, and have told your fortune.

  Mart. (embarrassed).  Told my fortune?

  Hyp.  Yes, yes; I know they did.  Give me your hand.
I'll tell you what they said.  They said,--they said,
The shepherd boy that loved you was a clown,
And him you should not marry.  Was it not?

  Mart. (surprised).  How know you that?

  Hyp.       O, I know more than that,
What a soft, little hand!  And then they said,
A cavalier from court, handsome, and tall
And rich, should come one day to marry you,
And you should be a lady.  Was it not!
He has arrived, the handsome cavalier.

(Tries to kiss her.  She runs off.  Enter VICTORIAN, with a
letter.)

  Vict.  The muleteer has come.

  Hyp.                    So soon?

  Vict.                    I found him
Sitting at supper by the tavern door,
And, from a pitcher that he held aloft
His whole arm's length, drinking the blood-red wine.

  Hyp.  What news from Court?

  Vict.   He brought this letter only.

(Reads.)

O cursed perfidy!  Why did I let
That lying tongue deceive me!  Preciosa,
Sweet Preciosa! how art thou avenged!

  Hyp.  What news is this, that makes thy cheek turn pale,
And thy hand tremble?

  Vict.            O, most infamous!
The Count of Lara is a worthless villain!

  Hyp.  That is no news, forsooth.

  Vict.              He strove in vain
To steal from me the jewel of my soul,
The love of Preciosa.  Not succeeding,
He swore to be revenged; and set on foot
A plot to ruin her, which has succeeded.
She has been hissed and hooted from the stage,
Her reputation stained by slanderous lies
Too foul to speak of; and, once more a beggar,
She roams a wanderer over God's green earth
Housing with Gypsies!

  Hyp.                To renew again
The Age of Gold, and make the shepherd swains
Desperate with love, like Gasper Gil's Diana.
Redit et Virgo!

  Vict.         Dear Hypolito,
How have I wronged that meek, confiding heart!
I will go seek for her; and with my tears
Wash out the wrong I've done her!

  Hyp.                     O beware!
Act not that folly o'er again.

  Vict.                     Ay, folly,
Delusion, madness, call it what thou wilt,
I will confess my weakness,--I still love her!
Still fondly love her!

(Enter the PADRE CURA.)

  Hyp.                Tell us, Padre Cura,
Who are these Gypsies in the neighborhood?

  Padre C.  Beltran Cruzado and his crew.

  Vict.               Kind Heaven,
I thank thee!  She is found! is found again!

  Hyp.  And have they with them a pale, beautiful girl,
Called Preciosa?

  Padre C.         Ay, a pretty girl.
The gentleman seems moved.

  Hyp.       Yes, moved with hunger,
He is half famished with this long day's journey.

  Padre C.  Then, pray you, come this way.  The supper waits.
                                 [Exeunt.



SCENE IV. -- A post-house on the road to Segovia, not far from
the village of Guadarrama.  Enter CHISPA, cracking a whip, and
singing the cachucha.

  Chispa.  Halloo!  Don Fulano!  Let us have horses, and quickly.
Alas, poor Chispa! what a dog's life dost thou lead!  I thought,
when I left my old master Victorian, the student, to serve my
new master Don Carlos, the gentleman, that I, too, should lead the
life of a gentleman; should go to bed early, and get up late.
For when the abbot plays cards, what can you expect of the
friars?  But, in running away from the thunder, I have run into
the lightning. Here I am in hot chase after my master and his
Gypsy girl. And a good beginning of the week it is, as he said
who was hanged on Monday morning.

(Enter DON CARLOS)

  Don C.  Are not the horses ready yet?

  Chispa.  I should think not, for the hostler seems to be
asleep. Ho! within there!  Horses! horses! horses!  (He knocks at
the gate  with his whip, and enter MOSQUITO, putting on his
jacket.)

  Mosq.  Pray, have a little patience.  I'm not a musket.

  Chispa.  Health and pistareens!  I'm glad to see you come on
dancing, padre!  Pray, what's the news?

  Mosq.  You cannot have fresh horses; because there are none.

  Chispa.  Cachiporra! Throw that bone to another dog.  Do I look
like your aunt?

  Mosq.  No; she has a beard.

  Chispa.  Go to! go to!

  Mosq.  Are you from Madrid?

  Chispa.  Yes; and going to Estramadura.  Get us horses.

  Mosq.  What's the news at Court?

  Chispa.  Why, the latest news is, that I am going to set up a
coach, and I have already bought the whip.

(Strikes him round the legs.)

  Mosq.  Oh! oh! You hurt me!

  Don C.  Enough of this folly.  Let us have horses.  (Gives
money to MOSQUITO.)  It is almost dark; and we are in haste.  But
tell me, has a band of Gypsies passed this way of late?

  Mosq.  Yes; and they are still in the neighborhood.

  Don C.  And where?

  Mosq.  Across the fields yonder, in the woods near Guadarrama.
                             [Exit.

  Don C.  Now this is lucky.  We will visit the Gypsy camp.

  Chispa.  Are you not afraid of the evil eye?  Have you a stag's
horn with you?

  Don C.  Fear not.  We will pass the night at the village.

  Chispa.  And sleep like the Squires of Hernan Daza, nine under
one blanket.

  Don C.  I hope we may find the Preciosa among them.

  Chispa.  Among the Squires?

  Don C.  No; among the Gypsies, blockhead!

  Chispa.  I hope we may; for we are giving ourselves trouble
enough on her account.  Don't you think so?  However, there is no
catching trout without wetting one's trousers.  Yonder come the
horses.
                              [Exeunt.



SCENE V. -- The Gypsy camp in the forest.  Night.  Gypsies
working at a forge.  Others playing cards by the firelight.
 Gypsies (at the forge sing).

On the top of a mountain I stand,
With a crown of red gold in my hand,
Wild Moors come trooping over the lea
O how from their fury shall I flee, flee, flee?
O how from their fury shall I flee?

  First Gypsy (playing).  Down with your John-Dorados, my pigeon.
Down with your John-Dorados, and let us make an end.

Gypsies (at the forge sing).

    Loud sang the Spanish cavalier,
     And thus his ditty ran;
    God send the Gypsy lassie here,
     And not the Gypsy man.

  First Gypsy (playing).  There you are in your morocco!

  Second Gypsy.  One more game.  The Alcalde's doves against the
Padre Cura's new moon.

  First Gypsy.  Have at you, Chirelin.

Gypsies (at the forge sing).

  At midnight, when the moon began
    To show her silver flame,
  There came to him no Gypsy man,
    The Gypsy lassie came.

(Enter BELTRAN CRUZADO.)

  Cruz.  Come hither, Murcigalleros and Rastilleros; leave work,
leave play; listen to your orders for the night.  (Speaking to
the right.)  You will get you to the village, mark you, by the
stone cross.

  Gypsies.  Ay!

  Cruz. (to the left).  And you, by the pole with the hermit's
head upon it.

  Gypsies.  Ay!

  Cruz.  As soon as you see the planets are out, in with you, and
be busy with the ten commandments, under the sly, and Saint
Martin asleep.  D'ye hear?

  Gypsies.  Ay!

  Cruz.  Keep your lanterns open, and, if you see a goblin or a
papagayo, take to your trampers.  Vineyards and Dancing John is
the word.  Am I comprehended?

  Gypsies.  Ay! ay!

  Cruz.  Away, then!

(Exeunt severally.  CRUZADO walks up the stage, and disappears
among the trees.  Enter PRECIOSA.)

  Prec.  How strangely gleams through the gigantic trees
The red light of the forge!  Wild, beckoning shadows
Stalk through the forest, ever and anon
Rising and bending with the flickering flame,
Then flitting into darkness!  So within me
Strange hopes and fears do beckon to each other,
My brightest hopes giving dark fears a being
As the light does the shadow.  Woe is me
How still it is about me, and how lonely!

(BARTOLOME rushes in.)

  Bart.  Ho!  Preciosa!

  Prec.                 O Bartolome!
Thou here?

  Bart.    Lo! I am here.

  Prec.         Whence comest thou?

  Bart.  From the rough ridges of the wild Sierra,
From caverns in the rocks, from hunger, thirst,
And fever!  Like a wild wolf to the sheepfold.
Come I for thee, my lamb.

  Prec.               O touch me not!
The Count of Lara's blood is on thy hands!
The Count of Lara's curse is on thy soul!
Do not come near me!  Pray, begone from here
Thou art in danger!  They have set a price
Upon thy head!

  Bart.    Ay, and I've wandered long
Among the mountains; and for many days
Have seen no human face, save the rough swineherd's.
The wind and rain have been my sole companions.
I shouted to them from the rocks thy name,
And the loud echo sent it back to me,
Till I grew mad.  I could not stay from thee,
And I am here!  Betray me, if thou wilt.

  Prec.  Betray thee?  I betray thee?

  Bart.                      Preciosa!
I come for thee! for thee I thus brave death!
Fly with me o'er the borders of this realm!
Fly with me!

  Prec.  Speak of that no more.  I cannot.
I'm thine no longer.

  Bart.               O, recall the time
When we were children! how we played together,
How we grew up together; how we plighted
Our hearts unto each other, even in childhood!
Fulfil thy promise, for the hour has come.
I'm hunted from the kingdom, like a wolf!
Fulfil thy promise.

  Prec.  'T was my father's promise.
Not mine.  I never gave my heart to thee,
Nor promised thee my hand!

  Bart.        False tongue of woman!
And heart more false!

  Prec.           Nay, listen unto me.
I will speak frankly.  I have never loved thee;
I cannot love thee.  This is not my fault,
It is my destiny.  Thou art a man
Restless and violent.  What wouldst thou with me,
A feeble girl, who have not long to live,
Whose heart is broken?  Seek another wife,
Better than I, and fairer; and let not
Thy rash and headlong moods estrange her from thee.
Thou art unhappy in this hopeless passion,
I never sought thy love; never did aught
To make thee love me.  Yet I pity thee,
And most of all I pity thy wild heart,
That hurries thee to crimes and deeds of blood,
Beware, beware of that.

  Bart.               For thy dear sake
I will be gentle.  Thou shalt teach me patience.

  Prec.  Then take this farewell, and depart in peace.
Thou must not linger here.

  Bart.          Come, come with me.

  Prec.  Hark! I hear footsteps.

  Bart.         I entreat thee, come!

  Prec.  Away!  It is in vain.

  Bart.          Wilt thou not come?

  Prec.  Never!

  Bart.         Then woe, eternal woe, upon thee!
Thou shalt not be another's.  Thou shalt die.
                                [Exit.

  Prec.  All holy angels keep me in this hour!
Spirit of her who bore me, look upon me!
Mother of God, the glorified, protect me!
Christ and the saints, be merciful unto me!
Yet why should I fear death?  What is it to die?
To leave all disappointment, care, and sorrow,
To leave all falsehood, treachery, and unkindness,
All ignominy, suffering, and despair,
And be at rest forever!  O dull heart,
Be of good cheer!  When thou shalt cease to beat,
Then shalt thou cease to suffer and complain!

(Enter VICTORIAN and HYPOLITO behind.)

  Vict.  'T is she!  Behold, how beautiful she stands
Under the tent-like trees!

  Hyp.             A woodland nymph!

  Vict.  I pray thee, stand aside.  Leave me.

  Hyp.                         Be wary.
Do not betray thyself too soon.

  Vict. (disguising his voice).  Hist!  Gypsy!

  Prec. (aside, with emotion).
That voice! that voice from heaven!  O speak again!
Who is it calls?

  Vict.           A friend.

  Prec. (aside).   'T is he!  'T is he!
I thank thee, Heaven, that thou hast heard my prayer,
And sent me this protector!  Now be strong,
Be strong, my heart!  I must dissemble here.
False friend or true?

  Vict.  A true friend to the true;
Fear not; come hither.  So; can you tell fortunes?

  Prec.  Not in the dark.  Come nearer to the fire.
Give me your hand.  It is not crossed, I see.

  Vict. (putting a piece of gold into her hand).  There is the
cross.

  Prec.         Is 't silver?

  Vict.                 No, 't is gold.

  Prec.  There's a fair lady at the Court, who loves you,
And for yourself alone.

  Vict.             Fie! the old story!
Tell me a better fortune for my money;
Not this old woman's tale!

  Prec.            You are passionate;
And this same passionate humor in your blood
Has marred your fortune.  Yes; I see it now;
The line of life is crossed by many marks.
Shame! shame!  O you have wronged the maid who loved you!
How could you do it?

  Vict.         I never loved a maid;
For she I loved was then a maid no more.

  Prec.  How know you that?

  Vict.         A little bird in the air
Whispered the secret.

  Prec.  There, take back your gold!
Your hand is cold, like a deceiver's hand!
There is no blessing in its charity!
Make her your wife, for you have been abused;
And you shall mend your fortunes, mending hers.

  Vict. (aside).  How like an angel's speaks the tongue of woman,
When pleading in another's cause her own!
That is a pretty ring upon your finger.
Pray give it me. (Tries to take the ring.)

  Prec.        No; never from my hand
Shall that be taken!

  Vict.            Why, 't is but a ring.
I'll give it back to you; or, if I keep it,
Will give you gold to buy you twenty such.

  Prec.  Why would you have this ring?

  Vict.            A traveller's fancy,
A whim, and nothing more.  I would fain keep it
As a memento of the Gypsy camp
In Guadarrama, and the fortune-teller
Who sent me back to wed a widowed maid.
Pray, let me have the ring.

  Prec.            No, never! never!
I will not part with it, even when I die;
But bid my nurse fold my pale fingers thus,
That it may not fall from them.  'T is a token
Of a beloved friend, who is no more.

  Vict.                     How? dead?

  Prec.  Yes; dead to me; and worse than dead.
He is estranged!  And yet I keep this ring.
I will rise with it from my grave hereafter,
To prove to him that I was never false.

  Vict. (aside).  Be still, my swelling heart! one moment, still!
Why, 't is the folly of a love-sick girl.
Come, give it me, or I will say 't is mine,
And that you stole it.

  Prec.            O, you will not dare
To utter such a falsehood!

  Vict.                    I not dare?
Look in my face, and say if there is aught
I have not dared, I would not dare for thee!

(She rushes into his arms.)

  Prec.  'T is thou! 't is thou!  Yes; yes; my heart's elected!
My dearest-dear Victorian! my soul's heaven!
Where hast thou been so long?  Why didst thou leave me?

  Vict.  Ask me not now, my dearest Preciosa.
Let me forget we ever have been parted!

  Prec.  Hadst thou not come--

  Vict.  I pray thee, do not chide me!

  Prec.  I should have perished here among these Gypsies.

  Vict.  Forgive me, sweet! for what I made thee suffer.
Think'st thou this heart could feel a moment's joy,
Thou being absent?  O, believe it not!
Indeed, since that sad hour I have not slept,
For thinking of the wrong I did to thee
Dost thou forgive me?  Say, wilt thou forgive me?

  Prec.  I have forgiven thee.  Ere those words of anger
Were in the book of Heaven writ down against thee,
I had forgiven thee.

  Vict.            I'm the veriest fool
That walks the earth, to have believed thee false.
It was the Count of Lara--

  Prec.                 That bad man
Has worked me harm enough.  Hast thou not heard--

  Vict.  I have heard all.  And yet speak on, speak on!
Let me but hear thy voice, and I am happy;
For every tone, like some sweet incantation,
Calls up the buried past to plead for me.
Speak, my beloved, speak into my heart,
Whatever fills and agitates thine own.

(They walk aside.)

  Hyp.  All gentle quarrels in the pastoral poets,
All passionate love scenes in the best romances,
All chaste embraces on the public stage,
All soft adventures, which the liberal stars
Have winked at, as the natural course of things,
Have been surpassed here by my friend, the student,
And this sweet Gypsy lass, fair Preciosa!

  Prec.  Senor Hypolito!  I kiss your hand.
Pray, shall I tell your fortune?

  Hyp.                      Not to-night;
For, should you treat me as you did Victorian,
And send me back to marry maids forlorn,
My wedding day would last from now till Christmas.

  Chispa (within).  What ho! the Gypsies, ho!  Beltran Cruzado!
Halloo! halloo! halloo! halloo!

(Enters booted, with a whip and lantern.

  Vict.                   What now
Why such a fearful din?  Hast thou been robbed?

  Chispa.  Ay, robbed and murdered; and good evening to you,
My worthy masters.

  Vict.  Speak; what brings thee here?

  CHISPA (to PRECIOSA).
Good news from Court; good news!  Beltran Cruzado,
The Count of the Cales, is not your father,
But your true father has returned to Spain
Laden with wealth.  You are no more a Gypsy.

  Vict.  Strange as a Moorish tale!

  Chispa.              And we have all
Been drinking at the tavern to your health,
As wells drink in November, when it rains.

  Vict.  Where is the gentlemen?

  Chispa.          As the old song says,
       His body is in Segovia,
         His soul is in Madrid,

  Prec.  Is this a dream?  O, if it be a dream,
Let me sleep on, and do not wake me yet!
Repeat thy story!  Say I'm not deceived!
Say that I do not dream!  I am awake;
This is the Gypsy camp; this is Victorian,
And this his friend, Hypolito!  Speak! speak!
Let me not wake and find it all a dream!

  Vict.  It is a dream, sweet child! a waking dream,
A blissful certainty, a vision bright
Of that rare happiness, which even on earth
Heaven gives to those it loves.  Now art thou rich,
As thou wast ever beautiful and good;
And I am now the beggar.

  Prec. (giving him her hand).  I have still
A hand to give.

  Chispa (aside).  And I have two to take.
I've heard my grandmother say, that Heaven gives almonds
To those who have no teeth.  That's nuts to crack,
I've teeth to spare, but where shall I find almonds?

  Vict.  What more of this strange story?

  Chispa.            Nothing more.
Your friend, Don Carlos, is now at the village
Showing to Pedro Crespo, the Alcalde,
The proofs of what I tell you.  The old hag,
Who stole you in your childhood, has confessed;
And probably they'll hang her for the crime,
To make the celebration more complete.

  Vict.  No; let it be a day of general joy;
Fortune comes well to all, that comes not late.
Now let us join Don Carlos.

  Hyp.                      So farewell,
The student's wandering life!  Sweet serenades,
Sung under ladies' windows in the night,
And all that makes vacation beautiful!
To you, ye cloistered shades of Alcala,
To you, ye radiant visions of romance,
Written in books, but here surpassed by truth,
The Bachelor Hypolito returns,
And leaves the Gypsy with the Spanish Student.



SCENE VI. -- A pass in the Guadarrama mountains.  Early morning.
A muleteer crosses the stage, sitting sideways on his mule and
lighting a paper cigar with flint and steel.

SONG.

If thou art sleeping, maiden,
  Awake and open thy door,
'T is the break of day, and we must away,
  O'er meadow, and mount, and moor.

Wait not to find thy slippers,
  But come with thy naked feet;
We shall have to pass through the dewy grass,
  And waters wide and fleet.

(Disappears down the pass.  Enter a Monk.  A shepherd appears on
the rocks above.)

  Monk.  Ave Maria, gratia plena.  Ola! good man!

  Shep.  Ola!

  Monk.  Is this the road to Segovia?

  Shep.  It is, your reverence.

  Monk.  How far is it?

  Shep.  I do not know.

  Monk.  What is that yonder in the valley?

  Shep.  San Ildefonso.

  Monk.  A long way to breakfast.

  Shep.  Ay, marry.

  Monk.  Are there robbers in these mountains?

  Shep.  Yes, and worse than that.

  Monk.  What?

  Shep.  Wolves.

  Monk.  Santa Maria!  Come with me to San Ildefonso, and thou
shalt be well rewarded.

  Shep.  What wilt thou give me?

  Monk.  An Agnus Dei and my benediction.

(They disappear.  A mounted Contrabandista passes, wrapped in his
cloak, and a gun at his saddle-bow.  He goes down the pass
singing.)

SONG.

Worn with speed is my good steed,
And I march me hurried, worried;
Onward, caballito mio,
With the white star in thy forehead!
Onward, for here comes the Ronda,
And I hear their rifles crack!
Ay, jaleo!  Ay, ay, jaleo!
Ay, jaleo!  They cross our track.

(Song dies away.  Enter PRECIOSA, on horseback, attended by
VICTORIAN, HYPOLITO, DON CARLOS, and CHISPA, on foot, and armed.)

  Vict.  This is the highest point.  Here let us rest.
See, Preciosa, see how all about us
Kneeling, like hooded friars, the misty mountains
Receive the benediction of the sun!
O glorious sight!

  Prec.           Most beautiful indeed!

  Hyp.  Most wonderful!

  Vict.        And in the vale below,
Where yonder steeples flash like lifted halberds,
San Ildefonso, from its noisy belfries,
Sends up a salutation to the morn,
As if an army smote their brazen shields,
And shouted victory!

  Prec.            And which way lies Segovia?

  Vict.    At a great distance yonder.
Dost thou not see it?

  Prec.           No.  I do not see it.

  Vict.  The merest flaw that dents the horizon's edge.
There, yonder!

  Hyp.       'T is a notable old town,
Boasting an ancient Roman aqueduct,
And an Alcazar, builded by the Moors,
Wherein, you may remember, poor Gil Blas
Was fed on Pan del Rey.  O, many a time
Out of its grated windows have I looked
Hundreds of feet plumb down to the Eresma,
That, like a serpent through the valley creeping,
Glides at its foot.

  Prec.               O yes!  I see it now,
Yet rather with my heart than with mine eyes,
So faint it is.  And all my thoughts sail thither,
Freighted with prayers and hopes, and forward urged
Against all stress of accident, as in
The Eastern Tale, against the wind and tide
Great ships were drawn to the Magnetic Mountains,
And there were wrecked, and perished in the sea!
(She weeps.)

  Vict.  O gentle spirit!  Thou didst bear unmoved
Blasts of adversity and frosts of fate!
But the first ray of sunshine that falls on thee
Melts thee to tears!  O, let thy weary heart
Lean upon mine! and it shall faint no more,
Nor thirst, nor hunger; but be comforted
And filled with my affection.

  Prec.                Stay no longer!
My father waits.  Methinks I see him there,
Now looking from the window, and now watching
Each sound of wheels or footfall in the street,
And saying, "Hark! she comes!"  O father! father!

(They descend the pass.  CHISPA remains behind.)

  Chispa.  I have a father, too, but he is a dead one.  Alas and
alack-a-day.  Poor was I born, and poor do I remain.  I neither
win nor lose.  Thus I was, through the world, half the time on
foot, and the other half walking; and always as merry as a
thunder-storm in the night.  And so we plough along, as the fly
said to the ox.  Who knows what may happen?  Patience, and
shuffle the cards!  I am not yet so bald that you can see my
brains; and perhaps, after all, I shall some day go to Rome, and
come back Saint Peter.  Benedicite!
[Exit.

(A pause.  Then enter BARTOLOME wildly, as if in pursuit, with a
carbine in his hand.)

  Bart.  They passed this way!  I hear their horses' hoofs!
Yonder I see them!  Come, sweet caramillo,
This serenade shall be the Gypsy's last!

(Fires down the pass.)

Ha! ha!  Well whistled, my sweet caramillo!
Well whistled!--I have missed her!--O my God!

(The shot is returned.  BARTOLOME falls).


****************

THE BELFRY OF BRUGES AND OTHER POEMS

THE BELFRY OF BRUGES
CARILLON

In the ancient town of Bruges,
In the quaint old Flemish city,
As the evening shades descended,
Low and loud and sweetly blended,
Low at times and loud at times,
And changing like a poet's rhymes,
Rang the beautiful wild chimes
From the Belfry in the market
Of the ancient town of Bruges.

Then, with deep sonorous clangor
Calmly answering their sweet anger,
When the wrangling bells had ended,
Slowly struck the clock eleven,
And, from out the silent heaven,
Silence on the town descended.
Silence, silence everywhere,
On the earth and in the air,
Save that footsteps here and there
Of some burgher home returning,
By the street lamps faintly burning,
For a moment woke the echoes
Of the ancient town of Bruges.

But amid my broken slumbers
Still I heard those magic numbers,
As they loud proclaimed the flight
And stolen marches of the night;
Till their chimes in sweet collision
Mingled with each wandering vision,
Mingled with the fortune-telling
Gypsy-bands of dreams and fancies,
Which amid the waste expanses
Of the silent land of trances
Have their solitary dwelling;
All else seemed asleep in Bruges,
In the quaint old Flemish city.

And I thought how like these chimes
Are the poet's airy rhymes,
All his rhymes and roundelays,
His conceits, and songs, and ditties,
From the belfry of his brain,
Scattered downward, though in vain,
On the roofs and stones of cities!
For by night the drowsy ear
Under its curtains cannot hear,
And by day men go their ways,
Hearing the music as they pass,
But deeming it no more, alas!
Than the hollow sound of brass.

Yet perchance a sleepless wight,
Lodging at some humble inn
In the narrow lanes of life,
When the dusk and hush of night
Shut out the incessant din
Of daylight and its toil and strife,
May listen with a calm delight
To the poet's melodies,
Till he hears, or dreams he hears,
Intermingled with the song,
Thoughts that he has cherished long;
Hears amid the chime and singing
The bells of his own village ringing,
And wakes, and finds his slumberous eyes
Wet with most delicious tears.

Thus dreamed I, as by night I lay
In Bruges, at the Fleur-de-Ble,
Listening with a wild delight
To the chimes that, through the night
Bang their changes from the Belfry
Of that quaint old Flemish city.



THE BELFRY OF BRUGES

In the market-place of Bruges stands the belfry old and brown;
Thrice consumed and thrice rebuilded, still it watches o'er the
town.

As the summer morn was breaking, on that lofty tower I stood,
And the world threw off the darkness, like the weeds of widowhood.

Thick with towns and hamlets studded, and with streams and vapors gray,
Like a shield embossed with silver, round and vast the landscape lay.

At my feet the city slumbered.  From its chimneys, here and there,
Wreaths of snow-white smoke, ascending, vanished, ghost-like, into air.

Not a sound rose from the city at that early morning hour,
But I heard a heart of iron beating in the ancient tower.

From their nests beneath the rafters sang the swallows wild and high;
And the world, beneath me sleeping, seemed more distant than the sky.

Then most musical and solemn, bringing back the olden times,
With their strange, unearthly changes rang the melancholy chimes,

Like the psalms from some old cloister, when the nuns sing in the choir;
And the great bell tolled among them, like the chanting of a friar.

Visions of the days departed, shadowy phantoms filled my brain;
They who live in history only seemed to walk the earth again;

All the Foresters of Flanders,--mighty Baldwin Bras de Fer,
Lyderick du Bucq and Cressy Philip, Guy de Dampierre.

I beheld the pageants splendid that adorned those days of old;
Stately dames, like queens attended, knights who bore the Fleece of Gold

Lombard and Venetian merchants with deep-laden argosies;
Ministers from twenty nations; more than royal pomp and ease.

I beheld proud Maximilian, kneeling humbly on the ground;
I beheld the gentle Mary, hunting with her hawk and hound;

And her lighted bridal-chamber, where a duke slept with the queen,
And the armed guard around them, and the sword unsheathed between.

I beheld the Flemish weavers, with Namur and Juliers bold,
Marching homeward from the bloody battle of the Spurs of Gold;

Saw the light at Minnewater, saw the White Hoods moving west,
Saw great Artevelde victorious scale the Golden Dragon's nest.

And again the whiskered Spaniard all the land with terror smote;
And again the wild alarum sounded from the tocsin's throat;

Till the bell of Ghent responded o'er lagoon and dike of sand,
"I am Roland!  I am Roland! there is victory in the land!"

Then the sound of drums aroused me.  The awakened city's roar
Chased the phantoms I had summoned back into their graves once more.

Hours had passed away like minutes; and, before I was aware,
Lo! the shadow of the belfry crossed the sun-illumined square.



A GLEAM OF SUNSHINE

This is the place.  Stand still, my steed,
  Let me review the scene,
And summon from the shadowy Past
  The forms that once have been.

The Past and Present here unite
  Beneath Time's flowing tide,
Like footprints hidden by a brook,
  But seen on either side.

Here runs the highway to the town;
  There the green lane descends,
Through which I walked to church with thee,
  O gentlest of my friends!

The shadow of the linden-trees
  Lay moving on the grass;
Between them and the moving boughs,
  A shadow, thou didst pass.

Thy dress was like the lilies,
  And thy heart as pure as they:
One of God's holy messengers
  Did walk with me that day.

I saw the branches of the trees
  Bend down thy touch to meet,
The clover-blossoms in the grass
  Rise up to kiss thy feet,

"Sleep, sleep to-day, tormenting cares,
  Of earth and folly born!"
Solemnly sang the village choir
  On that sweet Sabbath morn.

Through the closed blinds the golden sun
  Poured in a dusty beam,
Like the celestial ladder seen
  By Jacob in his dream.

And ever and anon, the wind,
  Sweet-scented with the hay,
Turned o'er the hymn-book's fluttering leaves
 That on the window lay.

Long was the good man's sermon,
  Yet it seemed not so to me;
For he spake of Ruth the beautiful,
  And still I thought of thee.

Long was the prayer he uttered,
  Yet it seemed not so to me;
For in my heart I prayed with him,
  And still I thought of thee.

But now, alas! the place seems changed;
  Thou art no longer here:
Part of the sunshine of the scene
  With thee did disappear.

Though thoughts, deep-rooted in my heart,
  Like pine-trees dark and high,
Subdue the light of noon, and breathe
  A low and ceaseless sigh;

This memory brightens o'er the past,
  As when the sun, concealed
Behind some cloud that near us hangs
  Shines on a distant field.



THE ARSENAL AT SPRINGFIELD

This is the Arsenal.  From floor to ceiling,
  Like a huge organ, rise the burnished arms;
But front their silent pipes no anthem pealing
  Startles the villages with strange alarms.

Ah! what a sound will rise, how wild and dreary,
  When the death-angel touches those swift keys
What loud lament and dismal Miserere
  Will mingle with their awful symphonies

I hear even now the infinite fierce chorus,
  The cries of agony, the endless groan,
Which, through the ages that have gone before us,
  In long reverberations reach our own.

On helm and harness rings the Saxon hammer,
  Through Cimbric forest roars the Norseman's song,
And loud, amid the universal clamor,
O'er distant deserts sounds the Tartar gong.

I hear the Florentine, who from his palace
  Wheels out his battle-bell with dreadful din,
And Aztec priests upon their teocallis
  Beat the wild war-drums made of serpent's skin;

The tumult of each sacked and burning village;
  The shout that every prayer for mercy drowns;
The soldiers' revels in the midst of pillage;
  The wail of famine in beleaguered towns;

The bursting shell, the gateway wrenched asunder,
  The rattling musketry, the clashing blade;
And ever and anon, in tones of thunder,
  The diapason of the cannonade.

Is it, O man, with such discordant noises,
  With such accursed instruments as these,
Thou drownest Nature's sweet and kindly voices,
  And jarrest the celestial harmonies?

Were half the power, that fills the world with terror,
  Were half the wealth, bestowed on camps and courts,
Given to redeem the human mind from error,
  There were no need of arsenals or forts:

The warrior's name would be a name abhorred!
  And every nation, that should lift again
Its hand against a brother, on its forehead
  Would wear forevermore the curse of Cain!

Down the dark future, through long generations,
  The echoing sounds grow fainter and then cease;
And like a bell, with solemn, sweet vibrations,
  I hear once more the voice of Christ say, "Peace!"

Peace! and no longer from its brazen portals
  The blast of War's great organ shakes the skies!
But beautiful as songs of the immortals,
  The holy melodies of love arise.



NUREMBERG

In the valley of the Pegnitz, where across broad meadow-lands
Rise the blue Franconian mountains, Nuremberg, the ancient, stands.

Quaint old town of toil and traffic, quaint old town of art and song,
Memories haunt thy pointed gables, like the rooks that round them throng:

Memories of the Middle Ages, when the emperors, rough and bold,
Had their dwelling in thy castle, time-defying, centuries old;

And thy brave and thrifty burghers boasted, in their uncouth rhyme,
That their great imperial city stretched its hand through every clime.

In the court-yard of the castle, bound with many an iron hand,
Stands the mighty linden planted by Queen Cunigunde's hand;

On the square the oriel window, where in old heroic days
Sat the poet Melchior singing Kaiser Maximilian's praise.

Everywhere I see around me rise the wondrous world of Art:
Fountains wrought with richest sculpture standing in the common mart;

And above cathedral doorways saints and bishops carved in stone,
By a former age commissioned as apostles to our own.

In the church of sainted Sebald sleeps enshrined his holy dust,
And in bronze the Twelve Apostles guard from age to age their trust;

In the church of sainted Lawrence stands a pix of sculpture rare,
Like the foamy sheaf of fountains, rising through the painted air.

Here, when Art was still religion, with a simple, reverent heart,
Lived and labored Albrecht Durer, the Evangelist of Art;

Hence in silence and in sorrow, toiling still with busy hand,
Like an emigrant he wandered, seeking for the Better Land.

Emigravit is the inscription on the tombstone where he lies;
Dead he is not, but departed,--for the artist never dies.

Fairer seems the ancient city, and the sunshine seems more fair,
That he once has trod its pavement, that he once has breathed its air!

Through these streets so broad and stately, these obscure and dismal lanes,
Walked of yore the Mastersingers, chanting rude poetic strains.

From remote and sunless suburbs came they to the friendly guild,
Building nests in Fame's great temple, as in spouts the swallows build.

As the weaver plied the shuttle, wove he too the mystic rhyme,
And the smith his iron measures hammered to the anvil's chime;

Thanking God, whose boundless wisdom makes the flowers of poesy bloom
In the forge's dust and cinders, in the tissues of the loom.

Here Hans Sachs, the cobbler-poet, laureate of the gentle craft,
Wisest of the Twelve Wise Masters, in huge folios sang and laughed.

But his house is now an ale-house, with a nicely sanded floor,
And a garland in the window, and his face above the door;

Painted by some humble artist, as in Adam Puschman's song,
As the old man gray and dove-like, with his great beard white and long.

And at night the swart mechanic comes to drown his cark and care,
Quaffing ale from pewter tankard; in the master's antique chair.

Vanished is the ancient splendor, and before my dreamy eye
Wave these mingled shapes and figures, like a faded tapestry.

Not thy Councils, not thy Kaisers, win for thee the world's regard;
But thy painter, Albrecht Durer, and Hans Sachs thy cobbler-bard.

Thus, O Nuremberg, a wanderer from a region far away,
As he paced thy streets and court-yards, sang in thought his careless lay:

Gathering from the pavement's crevice, as a floweret of the soil,
The nobility of labor,--the long pedigree of toil.



THE NORMAN BARON
  Dans les moments de la vie ou la reflexion devient plus calme
et plus profonde, ou l'interet et l'avarice parlent moins haut
que la raison, dans les instants de chagrin domestique, de
maladie, et de peril de mort, les nobles se repentirent de
posseder des serfs, comme d'une chose peu agreable a Dieu, qui
avait cree tous les hommes a son image.--THIERRY, Conquete de
l'Angleterre.

In his chamber, weak and dying,
Was the Norman baron lying;
Loud, without, the tempest thundered
      And the castle-turret shook,

In this fight was Death the gainer,
Spite of vassal and retainer,
And the lands his sires had plundered,
      Written in the Doomsday Book.

By his bed a monk was seated,
Who in humble voice repeated
Many a prayer and pater-noster,
      From the missal on his knee;

And, amid the tempest pealing,
Sounds of bells came faintly stealing,
Bells, that from the neighboring kloster
      Rang for the Nativity.

In the hall, the serf and vassal
Held, that night their Christmas wassail;
Many a carol, old and saintly,
      Sang the minstrels and the waits;

And so loud these Saxon gleemen
Sang to slaves the songs of freemen,
That the storm was heard but faintly,
      Knocking at the castle-gates.

Till at length the lays they chanted
Reached the chamber terror-haunted,
Where the monk, with accents holy,
      Whispered at the baron's ear.

Tears upon his eyelids glistened,
As he paused awhile and listened,
And the dying baron slowly
      Turned his weary head to hear.

"Wassail for the kingly stranger
Born and cradled in a manger!
King, like David, priest, like Aaron,
      Christ is born to set us free!"

And the lightning showed the sainted
Figures on the casement painted,
And exclaimed the shuddering baron,
      "Miserere, Domine!"

In that hour of deep contrition
He beheld, with clearer vision,
Through all outward show and fashion,
      Justice, the Avenger, rise.

All the pomp of earth had vanished,
Falsehood and deceit were banished,
Reason spake more loud than passion,
      And the truth wore no disguise.

Every vassal of his banner,
Every serf born to his manor,
All those wronged and wretched creatures,
      By his hand were freed again.

And, as on the sacred missal
He recorded their dismissal,
Death relaxed his iron features,
      And the monk replied, "Amen!"

Many centuries have been numbered
Since in death the baron slumbered
By the convent's sculptured portal,
      Mingling with the common dust:

But the good deed, through the ages
Living in historic pages,
Brighter grows and gleams immortal,
      Unconsumed by moth or rust



RAIN IN SUMMER

How beautiful is the rain!
After the dust and heat,
In the broad and fiery street,
In the narrow lane,
How beautiful is the rain!

How it clatters along the roofs,
Like the tramp of hoofs
How it gushes and struggles out
From the throat of the overflowing spout!

Across the window-pane
It pours and pours;
And swift and wide,
With a muddy tide,
Like a river down the gutter roars
The rain, the welcome rain!

The sick man from his chamber looks
At the twisted brooks;
He can feel the cool
Breath of each little pool;
His fevered brain
Grows calm again,
And he breathes a blessing on the rain.

From the neighboring school
Come the boys,
With more than their wonted noise
And commotion;
And down the wet streets
Sail their mimic fleets,
Till the treacherous pool
Ingulfs them in its whirling
And turbulent ocean.

In the country, on every side,
Where far and wide,
Like a leopard's tawny and spotted hide,
Stretches the plain,
To the dry grass and the drier grain
How welcome is the rain!

In the furrowed land
The toilsome and patient oxen stand;
Lifting the yoke encumbered head,
With their dilated nostrils spread,
They silently inhale
The clover-scented gale,
And the vapors that arise
From the well-watered and smoking soil.
For this rest in the furrow after toil
Their large and lustrous eyes
Seem to thank the Lord,
More than man's spoken word.

Near at hand,
From under the sheltering trees,
The farmer sees
His pastures, and his fields of grain,
As they bend their tops
To the numberless beating drops
Of the incessant rain.
He counts it as no sin
That he sees therein
Only his own thrift and gain.

These, and far more than these,
The Poet sees!
He can behold
Aquarius old
Walking the fenceless fields of air;
And from each ample fold
Of the clouds about him rolled
Scattering everywhere
The showery rain,
As the farmer scatters his grain.

He can behold
Things manifold
That have not yet been wholly told,--
Have not been wholly sung nor said.
For his thought, that never stops,
Follows the water-drops
Down to the graves of the dead,
Down through chasms and gulfs profound,
To the dreary fountain-head
Of lakes and rivers under ground;
And sees them, when the rain is done,
On the bridge of colors seven
Climbing up once more to heaven,
Opposite the setting sun.

Thus the Seer,
With vision clear,
Sees forms appear and disappear,
In the perpetual round of strange,
Mysterious change
From birth to death, from death to birth,
From earth to heaven, from heaven to earth;
Till glimpses more sublime
Of things, unseen before,
Unto his wondering eyes reveal
The Universe, as an immeasurable wheel
Turning forevermore
In the rapid and rushing river of Time.



TO A CHILD

Dear child! how radiant on thy mother's knee,
With merry-making eyes and jocund smiles,
Thou gazest at the painted tiles,
Whose figures grace,
With many a grotesque form and face.
The ancient chimney of thy nursery!
The lady with the gay macaw,
The dancing girl, the grave bashaw
With bearded lip and chin;
And, leaning idly o'er his gate,
Beneath the imperial fan of state,
The Chinese mandarin.

With what a look of proud command
Thou shakest in thy little hand
The coral rattle with its silver bells,
Making a merry tune!
Thousands of years in Indian seas
That coral grew, by slow degrees,
Until some deadly and wild monsoon
Dashed it on Coromandel's sand!
Those silver bells
Reposed of yore,
As shapeless ore,
Far down in the deep-sunken wells
Of darksome mines,
In some obscure and sunless place,
Beneath huge Chimborazo's base,
Or Potosi's o'erhanging pines
And thus for thee, O little child,
Through many a danger and escape,
The tall ships passed the stormy cape;
For thee in foreign lands remote,
Beneath a burning, tropic clime,
The Indian peasant, chasing the wild goat,
Himself as swift and wild,
In falling, clutched the frail arbute,
The fibres of whose shallow root,
Uplifted from the soil, betrayed
The silver veins beneath it laid,
The buried treasures of the miser, Time.

But, lo! thy door is left ajar!
Thou hearest footsteps from afar!
And, at the sound,
Thou turnest round
With quick and questioning eyes,
Like one, who, in a foreign land,
Beholds on every hand
Some source of wonder and surprise!
And, restlessly, impatiently,
Thou strivest, strugglest, to be free,
The four walls of thy nursery
Are now like prison walls to thee.
No more thy mother's smiles,
No more the painted tiles,
Delight thee, nor the playthings on the floor,
That won thy little, beating heart before;
Thou strugglest for the open door.

Through these once solitary halls
Thy pattering footstep falls.
The sound of thy merry voice
Makes the old walls
Jubilant, and they rejoice
With the joy of thy young heart,
O'er the light of whose gladness
No shadows of sadness
From the sombre background of memory start.

Once, ah, once, within these walls,
One whom memory oft recalls,
The Father of his Country, dwelt.
And yonder meadows broad and damp
The fires of the besieging camp
Encircled with a burning belt.
Up and down these echoing stairs,
Heavy with the weight of cares,
Sounded his majestic tread;
Yes, within this very room
Sat he in those hours of gloom,
Weary both in heart and head.

But what are these grave thoughts to thee?
Out, out! into the open air!
Thy only dream is liberty,
Thou carest little how or where.
I see thee eager at thy play,
Now shouting to the apples on the tree,
With cheeks as round and red as they;
And now among the yellow stalks,
Among the flowering shrubs and plants,
As restless as the bee.
Along the garden walks,
The tracks of thy small carriage-wheels I trace;
And see at every turn how they efface
Whole villages of sand-roofed tents,
That rise like golden domes
Above the cavernous and secret homes
Of wandering and nomadic tribes of ants.
Ah, cruel little Tamerlane,
Who, with thy dreadful reign,
Dost persecute and overwhelm
These hapless Troglodytes of thy realm!
What! tired already! with those suppliant looks,
And voice more beautiful than a poet's books,
Or murmuring sound of water as it flows.
Thou comest back to parley with repose;
This rustic seat in the old apple-tree,
With its o'erhanging golden canopy
Of leaves illuminate with autumnal hues,
And shining with the argent light of dews,
Shall for a season be our place of rest.
Beneath us, like an oriole's pendent nest,
From which the laughing birds have taken wing,
By thee abandoned, hangs thy vacant swing.
Dream-like the waters of the river gleam;
A sailless vessel drops adown the stream,
And like it, to a sea as wide and deep,
Thou driftest gently down the tides of sleep.

O child! O new-born denizen
Of life's great city! on thy head
The glory of the morn is shed,
Like a celestial benison!
Here at the portal thou dost stand,
And with thy little hand
Thou openest the mysterious gate
Into the future's undiscovered land.
I see its valves expand,
As at the touch of Fate!
Into those realms of love and hate,
Into that darkness blank and drear,
By some prophetic feeling taught,
I launch the bold, adventurous thought,
Freighted with hope and fear;
As upon subterranean streams,
In caverns unexplored and dark,
Men sometimes launch a fragile bark,
Laden with flickering fire,
And watch its swift-receding beams,
Until at length they disappear,
And in the distant dark expire.

By what astrology of fear or hope
Dare I to cast thy horoscope!
Like the new moon thy life appears;
A little strip of silver light,
And widening outward into night
The shadowy disk of future years;
And yet upon its outer rim,
A luminous circle, faint and dim,
And scarcely visible to us here,
Rounds and completes the perfect sphere;
A prophecy and intimation,
A pale and feeble adumbration,
Of the great world of light, that lies
Behind all human destinies.

Ah! if thy fate, with anguish fraught,
Should be to wet the dusty soil
With the hot tears and sweat of toil,--
To struggle with imperious thought,
Until the overburdened brain,
Weary with labor, faint with pain,
Like a jarred pendulum, retain
Only its motion, not its power,--
Remember, in that perilous hour,
When most afflicted and oppressed,
From labor there shall come forth rest.

And if a more auspicious fate
On thy advancing steps await
Still let it ever be thy pride
To linger by the laborer's side;
With words of sympathy or song
To cheer the dreary march along
Of the great army of the poor,
O'er desert sand, o'er dangerous moor.
Nor to thyself the task shall be
Without reward; for thou shalt learn
The wisdom early to discern
True beauty in utility;
As great Pythagoras of yore,
Standing beside the blacksmith's door,
And hearing the hammers, as they smote
The anvils with a different note,
Stole from the varying tones, that hung
Vibrant on every iron tongue,
The secret of the sounding wire.
And formed the seven-chorded lyre.

Enough! I will not play the Seer;
I will no longer strive to ope
The mystic volume, where appear
The herald Hope, forerunning Fear,
And Fear, the pursuivant of Hope.
Thy destiny remains untold;
For, like Acestes' shaft of old,
The swift thought kindles as it flies,
And burns to ashes in the skies.



THE OCCULTATION OF ORION

I saw, as in a dream sublime,
The balance in the hand of Time.
O'er East and West its beam impended;
And day, with all its hours of light,
Was slowly sinking out of sight,
While, opposite, the scale of night
Silently with the stars ascended.

Like the astrologers of eld,
In that bright vision I beheld
Greater and deeper mysteries.
I saw, with its celestial keys,
Its chords of air, its frets of fire,
The Samian's great Aeolian lyre,
Rising through all its sevenfold bars,
From earth unto the fixed stars.
And through the dewy atmosphere,
Not only could I see, but hear,
Its wondrous and harmonious strings,
In sweet vibration, sphere by sphere,
From Dian's circle light and near,
Onward to vaster and wider rings.
Where, chanting through his beard of snows,
Majestic, mournful, Saturn goes,
And down the sunless realms of space
Reverberates the thunder of his bass.

Beneath the sky's triumphal arch
This music sounded like a march,
And with its chorus seemed to be
Preluding some great tragedy.
Sirius was rising in the east;
And, slow ascending one by one,
The kindling constellations shone.
Begirt with many a blazing star,
Stood the great giant Algebar,
Orion, hunter of the beast!
His sword hung gleaming by his side,
And, on his arm, the lion's hide
Scattered across the midnight air
The golden radiance of its hair.

The moon was pallid, but not faint;
And beautiful as some fair saint,
Serenely moving on her way
In hours of trial and dismay.
As if she heard the voice of God,
Unharmed with naked feet she trod
Upon the hot and burning stars,
As on the glowing coals and bars,
That were to prove her strength, and try
Her holiness and her purity.

Thus moving on, with silent pace,
And triumph in her sweet, pale face,
She reached the station of Orion.
Aghast he stood in strange alarm!
And suddenly from his outstretched arm
Down fell the red skin of the lion
Into the river at his feet.
His mighty club no longer beat
The forehead of the bull; but he
Reeled as of yore beside the sea,
When, blinded by Oenopion,
He sought the blacksmith at his forge,
And, climbing up the mountain gorge,
Fixed his blank eyes upon the sun.

Then, through the silence overhead,
An angel with a trumpet said,
"Forevermore, forevermore,
The reign of violence is o'er!"
And, like an instrument that flings
Its music on another's strings,
The trumpet of the angel cast
Upon the heavenly lyre its blast,
And on from sphere to sphere the words
Re-echoed down the burning chords,--
"Forevermore, forevermore,
The reign of violence is o'er!"



THE BRIDGE

I stood on the bridge at midnight,
  As the clocks were striking the hour,
And the moon rose o'er the city,
  Behind the dark church-tower.

I saw her bright reflection
  In the waters under me,
Like a golden goblet falling
  And sinking into the sea.

And far in the hazy distance
  Of that lovely night in June,
The blaze of the flaming furnace
  Gleamed redder than the moon.

Among the long, black rafters
  The wavering shadows lay,
And the current that came from the ocean
  Seemed to lift and bear them away;

As, sweeping and eddying through them,
Rose the belated tide,
And, streaming into the moonlight,
  The seaweed floated wide.

And like those waters rushing
  Among the wooden piers,
A flood of thoughts came o'er me
  That filled my eyes with tears.

How often, oh, how often,
  In the days that had gone by,
I had stood on that bridge at midnight
  And gazed on that wave and sky!

How often, oh, how often,
  I had wished that the ebbing tide
Would bear me away on its bosom
  O'er the ocean wild and wide!

For my heart was hot and restless,
  And my life was full of care,
And the burden laid upon me
  Seemed greater than I could bear.

But now it has fallen from me,
  It is buried in the sea;
And only the sorrow of others
  Throws its shadow over me.

Yet whenever I cross the river
  On its bridge with wooden piers,
Like the odor of brine from the ocean
  Comes the thought of other years.

And I think how many thousands
  Of care-encumbered men,
Each bearing his burden of sorrow,
  Have crossed the bridge since then.

I see the long procession
  Still passing to and fro,
The young heart hot and restless,
  And the old subdued and slow!

And forever and forever,
  As long as the river flows,
As long as the heart has passions,
  As long as life has woes;

The moon and its broken reflection
  And its shadows shall appear,
As the symbol of love in heaven,
  And its wavering image here.



TO THE DRIVING CLOUD

Gloomy and dark art thou, O chief of the mighty Omahas;
Gloomy and dark as the driving cloud, whose name thou hast taken!
Wrapt in thy scarlet blanket, I see thee stalk through the city's
Narrow and populous streets, as once by the margin of rivers
Stalked those birds unknown, that have left us only their footprints.
What, in a few short years, will remain of thy race but the footprints?

How canst thou walk these streets, who hast trod the green turf of the prairies!
How canst thou breathe this air, who hast breathed the sweet air of the mountains!
Ah! 't is in vain that with lordly looks of disdain thou dost challenge
Looks of disdain in return, and question these walls and these pavements,
Claiming the soil for thy hunting-grounds, while down-trodden millions
Starve in the garrets of Europe, and cry from its caverns that they, too,
Have been created heirs of the earth, and claim its division!

Back, then, back to thy woods in the regions west of the Wabash!
There as a monarch thou reignest.  In autumn the leaves of the maple
Pave the floors of thy palace-halls with gold, and in summer
Pine-trees waft through its chambers the odorous breath of their branches.
There thou art strong and great, a hero, a tamer of horses!
There thou chasest the stately stag on the banks of the Elkhorn,
Or by the roar of the Running-Water, or where the Omaha
Calls thee, and leaps through the wild ravine like a brave of the
Blackfeet!

Hark! what murmurs arise from the heart of those mountainous deserts?
Is it the cry of the Foxes and Crows, or the mighty Behemoth,
Who, unharmed, on his tusks once caught the bolts of the thunder,
And now lurks in his lair to destroy the race of the red man?
Far more fatal to thee and thy race than the Crows and the Foxes,
Far more fatal to thee and thy race than the tread of Behemoth,
Lo! the big thunder-canoe, that steadily breasts the Missouri's
Merciless current! and yonder, afar on the prairies, the camp-fires
Gleam through the night; and the cloud of dust in the gray of the daybreak
Marks not the buffalo's track, nor the Mandan's dexterous horse-race;
It is a caravan, whitening the desert where dwell the Camanches!
Ha! how the breath of these Saxons and Celts, like the blast of the east-wind,
Drifts evermore to the west the scanty smokes of thy wigwams!



SONGS

THE DAY IS DONE

The day is done, and the darkness
  Falls from the wings of Night,
As a feather is wafted downward
  From an eagle in his flight.

I see the lights of the village
  Gleam through the rain and the mist,
And a feeling of sadness comes o'er me
  That my soul cannot resist:

A feeling of sadness and longing,
  That is not akin to pain,
And resembles sorrow only
  As the mist resembles the rain.

Come, read to me some poem,
  Some simple and heartfelt lay,
That shall soothe this restless feeling,
  And banish the thoughts of day.

Not from the grand old masters,
  Not from the bards sublime,
Whose distant footsteps echo
  Through the corridors of Time.

For, like strains of martial music,
  Their mighty thoughts suggest
Life's endless toil and endeavor;
  And to-night I long for rest.

Read from some humbler poet,
  Whose songs gushed from his heart,
As showers from the clouds of summer,
  Or tears from the eyelids start;

Who, through long days of labor,
  And nights devoid of ease,
Still heard in his soul the music
  Of wonderful melodies.

Such songs have power to quiet
  The restless pulse of care,
And come like the benediction
  That follows after prayer.

Then read from the treasured volume
  The poem of thy choice,
And lend to the rhyme of the poet
  The beauty of thy voice.

And the night shall be filled with music
  And the cares, that infest the day,
Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
  And as silently steal away.



AFTERNOON IN FEBRUARY

The day is ending,
The night is descending;
The marsh is frozen,
The river dead.

Through clouds like ashes
The red sun flashes
On village windows
That glimmer red.

The snow recommences;
The buried fences
Mark no longer
The road o'er the plain;

While through the meadows,
Like fearful shadows,
Slowly passes
A funeral train.

The bell is pealing,
And every feeling
Within me responds
To the dismal knell;

Shadows are trailing,
My heart is bewailing
And tolling within
Like a funeral bell.



TO AN OLD DANISH SONG-BOOK

Welcome, my old friend,
Welcome to a foreign fireside,
While the sullen gales of autumn
Shake the windows.

The ungrateful world
Has, it seems, dealt harshly with thee,
Since, beneath the skies of Denmark,
First I met thee.

There are marks of age,
There are thumb-marks on thy margin,
Made by hands that clasped thee rudely,
At the alehouse.

Soiled and dull thou art;
Yellow are thy time-worn pages,
As the russet, rain-molested
Leaves of autumn.

Thou art stained with wine
Scattered from hilarious goblets,
As the leaves with the libations
Of Olympus.

Yet dost thou recall
Days departed, half-forgotten,
When in dreamy youth I wandered
By the Baltic,--

When I paused to hear
The old ballad of King Christian
Shouted from suburban taverns
In the twilight.

Thou recallest bards,
Who in solitary chambers,
And with hearts by passion wasted,
Wrote thy pages.

Thou recallest homes
Where thy songs of love and friendship
Made the gloomy Northern winter
Bright as summer.

Once some ancient Scald,
In his bleak, ancestral Iceland,
Chanted staves of these old ballads
To the Vikings.

Once in Elsinore,
At the court of old King Hamlet
Yorick and his boon companions
Sang these ditties.

Once Prince Frederick's Guard
Sang them in their smoky barracks;--
Suddenly the English cannon
Joined the chorus!

Peasants in the field,
Sailors on the roaring ocean,
Students, tradesmen, pale mechanics,
All have sung them.

Thou hast been their friend;
They, alas! have left thee friendless!
Yet at least by one warm fireside
Art thou welcome.

And, as swallows build
In these wide, old-fashioned chimneys,
So thy twittering songs shall nestle
In my bosom,--

Quiet, close, and warm,
Sheltered from all molestation,
And recalling by their voices
Youth and travel.



WALTER VON DER VOGELWEID

Vogelweid the Minnesinger,
  When he left this world of ours,
Laid his body in the cloister,
  Under Wurtzburg's minster towers.

And he gave the monks his treasures,
  Gave them all with this behest:
They should feed the birds at noontide
  Daily on his place of rest;

Saying, "From these wandering minstrels
  I have learned the art of song;
Let me now repay the lessons
  They have taught so well and long."

Thus the bard of love departed;
  And, fulfilling his desire,
On his tomb the birds were feasted
  By the children of the choir.

Day by day, o'er tower and turret,
  In foul weather and in fair,
Day by day, in vaster numbers,
  Flocked the poets of the air.

On the tree whose heavy branches
  Overshadowed all the place,
On the pavement, on the tombstone,
  On the poet's sculptured face,

On the cross-bars of each window,
  On the lintel of each door,
They renewed the War of Wartburg,
  Which the bard had fought before.

There they sang their merry carols,
  Sang their lauds on every side;
And the name their voices uttered
  Was the name of Vogelweid.

Till at length the portly abbot
  Murmured, "Why this waste of food?
Be it changed to loaves henceforward
  For our tasting brotherhood."

Then in vain o'er tower and turret,
  From the walls and woodland nests,
When the minster bells rang noontide,
  Gathered the unwelcome guests.

Then in vain, with cries discordant,
  Clamorous round the Gothic spire,
Screamed the feathered Minnesingers
  For the children of the choir.

Time has long effaced the inscriptions
  On the cloister's funeral stones,
And tradition only tells us
  Where repose the poet's bones.

But around the vast cathedral,
  By sweet echoes multiplied,
Still the birds repeat the legend,
  And the name of Vogelweid.



DRINKING SONG

INSCRIPTION FOR AN ANTIQUE PITCHER

Come, old friend! sit down and listen!
  From the pitcher, placed between us,
How the waters laugh and glisten
  In the head of old Silenus!

Old Silenus, bloated, drunken,
  Led by his inebriate Satyrs;
On his breast his head is sunken,
  Vacantly he leers and chatters.

Fauns with youthful Bacchus follow;
  Ivy crowns that brow supernal
As the forehead of Apollo,
  And possessing youth eternal.

Round about him, fair Bacchantes,
  Bearing cymbals, flutes, and thyrses,
Wild from Naxian groves, or Zante's
  Vineyards, sing delirious verses.

Thus he won, through all the nations,
  Bloodless victories, and the farmer
Bore, as trophies and oblations,
  Vines for banners, ploughs for armor.

Judged by no o'erzealous rigor,
  Much this mystic throng expresses:
Bacchus was the type of vigor,
  And Silenus of excesses.

These are ancient ethnic revels,
  Of a faith long since forsaken;
Now the Satyrs, changed to devils,
  Frighten mortals wine-o'ertaken.

Now to rivulets from the mountains
  Point the rods of fortune-tellers;
Youth perpetual dwells in fountains,--
  Not in flasks, and casks, and cellars.

Claudius, though he sang of flagons
  And huge tankards filled with Rhenish,
From that fiery blood of dragons
  Never would his own replenish.

Even Redi, though he chaunted
  Bacchus in the Tuscan valleys,
Never drank the wine he vaunted
  In his dithyrambic sallies.

Then with water fill the pitcher
  Wreathed about with classic fables;
Ne'er Falernian threw a richer
  Light upon Lucullus' tables.

Come, old friend, sit down and listen
  As it passes thus between us,
How its wavelets laugh and glisten
  In the head of old Silenus!



THE OLD CLOCK ON THE STAIRS

L'eternite est une pendule, dont le balancier dit et redit sans
cesse ces deux mots seulement dans le silence des tombeaux:
"Toujours! jamais!  Jamais! toujours!"--JACQUES BRIDAINE.

Somewhat back from the village street
Stands the old-fashioned country-seat.
Across its antique portico
Tall poplar-trees their shadows throw;
And from its station in the hall
An ancient timepiece says to all,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

Half-way up the stairs it stands,
And points and beckons with its hands
From its case of massive oak,
Like a monk, who, under his cloak,
Crosses himself, and sighs, alas!
With sorrowful voice to all who pass,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

By day its voice is low and light;
But in the silent dead of night,
Distinct as a passing footstep's fall,
It echoes along the vacant hall,
Along the ceiling, along the floor,
And seems to say, at each chamber-door,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

Through days of sorrow and of mirth,
Through days of death and days of birth,
Through every swift vicissitude
Of changeful time, unchanged it has stood,
And as if, like God, it all things saw,
It calmly repeats those words of awe,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

In that mansion used to be
Free-hearted Hospitality;
His great fires up the chimney roared;
The stranger feasted at his board;
But, like the skeleton at the feast,
That warning timepiece never ceased,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

There groups of merry children played,
There youths and maidens dreaming strayed;
O precious hours! O golden prime,
And affluence of love and time!
Even as a Miser counts his gold,
Those hours the ancient timepiece told,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

From that chamber, clothed in white,
The bride came forth on her wedding night;
There, in that silent room below,
The dead lay in his shroud of snow;
And in the hush that followed the prayer,
Was heard the old clock on the stair,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

All are scattered now and fled,
Some are married, some are dead;
And when I ask, with throbs of pain.
"Ah! when shall they all meet again?"
As in the days long since gone by,
The ancient timepiece makes reply,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"

Never here, forever there,
Where all parting, pain, and care,
And death, and time shall disappear,--
Forever there, but never here!
The horologe of Eternity
Sayeth this incessantly,--
      "Forever--never!
      Never--forever!"



THE ARROW AND THE SONG

I shot an arrow into the air,
It fell to earth, I knew not where;
For, so swiftly it flew, the sight
Could not follow it in its flight.

I breathed a song into the air,
It fell to earth, I knew not where;
For who has sight so keen and strong,
That it can follow the flight of song?

Long, long afterward, in an oak
I found the arrow, still unbroke;
And the song, from beginning to end,
I found again in the heart of a friend.



SONNETS

MEZZO CAMMIN

Half of my life is gone, and I have let
  The years slip from me and have not fulfilled
  The aspiration of my youth, to build
  Some tower of song with lofty parapet.
Not indolence, nor pleasure, nor the fret
  Of restless passions chat would not be stilled,
  But sorrow, and a care that almost killed,
  Kept me from what I may accomplish yet;
Though, half way up the hill, I see the Past
  Lying beneath me with its sounds and sights,--
  A city in the twilight dim and vast,
With smoking roofs, soft bells, and gleaming lights.--
  And hear above me on the autumnal blast
  The cataract of Death far thundering from the heights.



THE EVENING STAR

Lo! in the painted oriel of the West,
  Whose panes the sunken sun incarnadines,
  Like a fair lady at her casement, shines
  The evening star, the star of love and rest!
And then anon she doth herself divest
  Of all her radiant garments, and reclines
  Behind the sombre screen of yonder pines,
  With slumber and soft dreams of love oppressed.
O my beloved, my sweet Hesperus!
  My morning and my evening star of love!
  My best and gentlest lady! even thus,
As that fair planet in the sky above,
  Dost thou retire unto thy rest at night,
  And from thy darkened window fades the light.



AUTUMN

Thou comest, Autumn, heralded by the rain,
  With banners, by great gales incessant fanned,
  Brighter than brightest silks of Samarcand,
  And stately oxen harnessed to thy wain!
Thou standest, like imperial Charlemagne,
  Upon thy bridge of gold; thy royal hand
  Outstretched with benedictions o'er the land,
  Blessing the farms through all thy vast domain!
Thy shield is the red harvest moon, suspended
  So long beneath the heaven's o'er-hanging eaves;
  Thy steps are by the farmer's prayers attended;
Like flames upon an altar shine the sheaves;
  And, following thee, in thy ovation splendid,
  Thine almoner, the wind, scatters the golden leaves!



DANTE

Tuscan, that wanderest through the realms of gloom,
  With thoughtful pace, and sad, majestic eyes,
  Stern thoughts and awful from thy soul arise,
  Like Farinata from his fiery tomb.
Thy sacred song is like the trump of doom;
  Yet in thy heart what human sympathies,
  What soft compassion glows, as in the skies
  The tender stars their clouded lamps relume!
Methinks I see thee stand, with pallid cheeks,
  By Fra Hilario in his diocese,
  As up the convent-walls, in golden streaks,
The ascending sunbeams mark the day's decrease;
  And, as he asks what there the stranger seeks,
  Thy voice along the cloister whispers, "Peace!"



CURFEW

I.

Solemnly, mournfully,
  Dealing its dole,
The Curfew Bell
  Is beginning to toll.

Cover the embers,
  And put out the light;
Toil comes with the morning,
  And rest with the night.

Dark grow the windows,
  And quenched is the fire;
Sound fades into silence,--
  All footsteps retire.

No voice in the chambers,
  No sound in the hall!
Sleep and oblivion
  Reign over all!


II.

The book is completed,
  And closed, like the day;
And the hand that has written it
  Lays it away.

Dim grow its fancies;
  Forgotten they lie;
Like coals in the ashes,
  They darken and die.

Song sinks into silence,
  The story is told,
The windows are darkened,
  The hearth-stone is cold.

Darker and darker
  The black shadows fall;
Sleep and oblivion
  Reign over all.


************

EVANGELINE

A TALE OF ACADIE

This is the forest primeval.  The murmuring pines and the hemlocks,
Bearded with moss, and in garments green, indistinct in the twilight,
Stand like Druids of eld, with voices sad and prophetic,
Stand like harpers hoar, with beards that rest on their bosoms.
Loud from its rocky caverns, the deep-voiced neighboring ocean
Speaks, and in accents disconsolate answers the wail of the forest.

  This is the forest primeval; but where are the hearts that beneath it
Leaped like the roe, when he hears in the woodland the voice of the huntsman
Where is the thatch-roofed village, the home of Acadian farmers,--
Men whose lives glided on like rivers that water the woodlands,
Darkened by shadows of earth, but reflecting an image of heaven?
Waste are those pleasant farms, and the farmers forever departed!
Scattered like dust and leaves, when the mighty blasts of October
Seize them, and whirl them aloft, and sprinkle them far o'er the ocean
Naught but tradition remains of the beautiful village of Grand-Pre.

  Ye who believe in affection that hopes, and endures, and is patient,
Ye who believe in the beauty and strength of woman's devotion,
List to the mournful tradition still sung by the pines of the forest;
List to a Tale of Love in Acadie, home of the happy.



PART THE FIRST

I

In the Acadian land, on the shores of the Basin of Minas,
Distant, secluded, still, the little village of Grand-Pre
Lay in the fruitful valley.  Vast meadows stretched to the eastward,
Giving the village its name, and pasture to flocks without number.
Dikes, that the hands of the farmers had raised with labor incessant,
Shut out the turbulent tides; but at stated seasons the flood-gates
Opened, and welcomed the sea to wander at will o'er the meadows.
West and south there were fields of flax, and orchards and cornfields
Spreading afar and unfenced o'er the plain; and away to the northward
Blomidon rose, and the forests old, and aloft on the mountains
Sea-fogs pitched their tents, and mists from the mighty Atlantic
Looked on the happy valley, but ne'er from their station descended
There, in the midst of its farms, reposed the Acadian village.
Strongly built were the houses, with frames of oak and of hemlock,
Such as the peasants of Normandy built in the reign of the Henries.
Thatched were the roofs, with dormer-windows; and gables projecting
Over the basement below protected and shaded the doorway.
There in the tranquil evenings of summer, when brightly the sunset
Lighted the village street and gilded the vanes on the chimneys,
Matrons and maidens sat in snow-white caps and in kirtles
Scarlet and blue and green, with distaffs spinning the golden
Flax for the gossiping looms, whose noisy shuttles within doors
Mingled their sound with the whir of the wheels and the songs of the maidens,
Solemnly down the street came the parish priest, and the children
Paused in their play to kiss the hand he extended to bless them.
Reverend walked he among them; and up rose matrons and maidens,
Hailing his slow approach with words of affectionate welcome.
Then came the laborers home from the field, and serenely the sun sank
Down to his rest, and twilight prevailed.  Anon from the belfry
Softly the Angelus sounded, and over the roofs of the village
Columns of pale blue smoke, like clouds of incense ascending,
Rose from a hundred hearths, the homes of peace and contentment.
Thus dwelt together in love these simple Acadian farmers,--
Dwelt in the love of God and of man.  Alike were they free from
Fear, that reigns with the tyrant, and envy, the vice of republics.
Neither locks had they to their doors, nor bars to their windows;
But their dwellings were open as day and the hearts of their owners;
There the richest was poor, and the poorest lived in abundance.

  Somewhat apart from the village, and nearer the Basin of Minas,
Benedict Bellefontaine, the wealthiest farmer of Grand-Pre,
Dwelt on his goodly acres: and with him, directing his household,
Gentle Evangeline lived, his child, and the pride of the village.
Stalworth and stately in form was the man of seventy winters;
Hearty and hale was he, an oak that is covered with snow-flakes;
White as the snow were his locks, and his cheeks as brown as the oak-leaves.
Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seventeen summers.
Black were her eyes as the berry that grows on the thorn by the wayside,
Black, yet how softly they gleamed beneath the brown shade of her tresses!
Sweet was her breath as the breath of kine that feed in the meadows.
When in the harvest heat she bore to the reapers at noontide
Flagons of home-brewed ale, ah! fair in sooth was the maiden,
Fairer was she when, on Sunday morn, while the bell from its turret
Sprinkled with holy sounds the air, as the priest with his hyssop
Sprinkles the congregation, and scatters blessings upon them,
Down the long street she passed, with her chaplet of beads and her missal,
Wearing her Norman cap and her kirtle of blue, and the ear-rings,
Brought in the olden time from France, and since, as an heirloom,
Handed down from mother to child, through long generations.
But a celestial brightness--a more ethereal beauty--
Shone on her face and encircled her form, when, after confession,
Homeward serenely she walked with God's benediction upon her.
When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.

  Firmly builded with rafters of oak, the house of the farmer
Stood on the side of a hill commanding the sea; and a shady
Sycamore grew by the door, with a woodbine wreathing around it.
Rudely carved was the porch, with seats beneath; and a footpath
Led through an orchard wide, and disappeared in the meadow.
Under the sycamore-tree were hives overhung by a penthouse,
Such as the traveller sees in regions remote by the roadside,
Built o'er a box for the poor, or the blessed image of Mary.
Farther down, on the slope of the hill, was the well with its moss-grown
Bucket, fastened with iron, and near it a trough for the horses.
Shielding the house from storms, on the north, were the barns and the farm-yard,
There stood the broad-wheeled wains and the antique ploughs and the harrows;
There were the folds for the sheep; and there, in his feathered seraglio,
Strutted the lordly turkey, and crowed the cock, with the selfsame
Voice that in ages of old had startled the penitent Peter.
Bursting with hay were the barns, themselves a village.  In each one
Far o'er the gable projected a roof of thatch; and a staircase,
Under the sheltering eaves, led up to the odorous corn-loft.
There too the dove-cot stood, with its meek and innocent inmates
Murmuring ever of love; while above in the variant breezes
Numberless noisy weathercocks rattled and sang of mutation.

  Thus, at peace with God and the world, the farmer of Grand-Pre
Lived on his sunny farm, and Evangeline governed his household.
Many a youth, as he knelt in the church and opened his missal,
Fixed his eyes upon her as the saint of his deepest devotion;
Happy was he who might touch her hand or the hem of her garment!
Many a suitor came to her door, by the darkness befriended,
And, as he knocked and waited to hear the sound of her footsteps,
Knew not which beat the louder, his heart or the knocker of iron;
Or at the joyous feast of the Patron Saint of the village,
Bolder grew, and pressed her hand in the dance as he whispered
Hurried words of love, that seemed a part of the music.
But, among all who came, young Gabriel only was welcome;
Gabriel Lajeunesse, the son of Basil the blacksmith,
Who was a mighty man in the village, and honored of all men;
For, since the birth of time, throughout all ages and nations,
Has the craft of the smith been held in repute by the people.
Basil was Benedict's friend.  Their children from earliest childhood
Grew up together as brother and sister; and Father Felician,
Priest and pedagogue both in the village, had taught them their letters
Out of the selfsame book, with the hymns of the church and the plain-song.
But when the hymn was sung, and the daily lesson completed,
Swiftly they hurried away to the forge of Basil the blacksmith.
There at the door they stood, with wondering eyes to behold him
Take in his leathern lap the hoof of the horse as a plaything,
Nailing the shoe in its place; while near him the tire of the cart-wheel
Lay like a fiery snake, coiled round in a circle of cinders.
Oft on autumnal eves, when without in the gathering darkness
Bursting with light seemed the smithy, through every cranny and crevice,
Warm by the forge within they watched the laboring bellows,
And as its panting ceased, and the sparks expired in the ashes,
Merrily laughed, and said they were nuns going into the chapel.
Oft on sledges in winter, as swift as the swoop of the eagle,
Down the hillside hounding, they glided away o'er the meadow.
Oft in the barns they climbed to the populous nests on the rafters,
Seeking with eager eyes that wondrous stone, which the swallow
Brings from the shore of the sea to restore the sight of its fledglings;
Lucky was he who found that stone in the nest of the swallow!
Thus passed a few swift years, and they no longer were children.
He was a valiant youth, and his face, like the face of the morning,
Gladdened the earth with its light, and ripened thought into action.
She was a woman now, with the heart and hopes of a woman.
"Sunshine of Saint Eulalie" was she called; for that was the sunshine
Which, as the farmers believed, would load their orchards with apples
She, too, would bring to her husband's house delight and abundance,
Filling it full of love and the ruddy faces of children.



II

Now had the season returned, when the nights grow colder and longer,
And the retreating sun the sign of the Scorpion enters.
Birds of passage sailed through the leaden air, from the ice-bound,
Desolate northern bays to the shores of tropical islands,
Harvests were gathered in; and wild with the winds of September
Wrestled the trees of the forest, as Jacob of old with the angel.
All the signs foretold a winter long and inclement.
Bees, with prophetic instinct of want, had hoarded their honey
Till the hives overflowed; and the Indian bunters asserted
Cold would the winter be, for thick was the fur of the foxes.
Such was the advent of autumn.  Then followed that beautiful season,
Called by the pious Acadian peasants the Summer of All-Saints!
Filled was the air with a dreamy and magical light; and the landscape
Lay as if new-created in all the freshness of childhood.
Peace seemed to reign upon earth, and the restless heart of the ocean
Was for a moment consoled.  All sounds were in harmony blended.
Voices of children at play, the crowing of cocks in the farm-yards,
Whir of wings in the drowsy air, and the cooing of pigeons,
All were subdued and low as the murmurs of love, and the great sun
Looked with the eye of love through the golden vapors around him;
While arrayed in its robes of russet and scarlet and yellow,
Bright with the sheen of the dew, each glittering tree of the forest
Flashed like the plane-tree the Persian adorned with mantles and
jewels.

  Now recommenced the reign of rest and affection and stillness.
Day with its burden and heat had departed, and twilight descending
Brought back the evening star to the sky, and the herds to the homestead.
Pawing the ground they came, and resting their necks on each other,
And with their nostrils distended inhaling the freshness of evening.
Foremost, bearing the bell, Evangeline's beautiful heifer,
Proud of her snow-white hide, and the ribbon that waved from her collar,
Quietly paced and slow, as if conscious of human affection.
Then came the shepherd back with his bleating flocks from the seaside,
Where was their favorite pasture.  Behind them followed the watch-dog,
Patient, full of importance, and grand in the pride of his instinct,
Walking from side to side with a lordly air, and superbly
Waving his bushy tail, and urging forward the stragglers;
Regent of flocks was he when the shepherd slept; their protector,
When from the forest at night, through the starry silence, the wolves howled.
Late, with the rising moon, returned the wains from the marshes,
Laden with briny hay, that filled the air with its odor.
Cheerily neighed the steeds, with dew on their manes and their fetlocks,
While aloft on their shoulders the wooden and ponderous saddles,
Painted with brilliant dyes, and adorned with tassels of crimson,
Nodded in bright array, like hollyhocks heavy with blossoms.
Patiently stood the cows meanwhile, and yielded their udders
Unto the milkmaid's hand; whilst loud and in regular cadence
Into the sounding pails the foaming streamlets descended.
Lowing of cattle and peals of laughter were heard in the farm-yard,
Echoed back by the barns.  Anon they sank into stillness;
Heavily closed, with a jarring sound, the valves of the barn-doors,
Rattled the wooden bars, and all for a season was silent.

  In-doors, warm by the wide-mouthed fireplace, idly the farmer
Sat in his elbow-chair, and watched how the flames and the smoke-wreaths
Struggled together like foes in a burning city.  Behind him,
Nodding and mocking along the wall, with gestures fantastic,
Darted his own huge shadow, and vanished away into darkness.
Faces, clumsily carved in oak, on the back of his arm-chair
Laughed in the flickering light, and the pewter plates on the dresser
Caught and reflected the flame, as shields of armies the sunshine.
Fragments of song the old man sang, and carols of Christmas,
Such as at home, in the olden time, his fathers before him
Sang in their Norman orchards and bright Burgundian vineyards.
Close at her father's side was the gentle Evangeline seated,
Spinning flax for the loom, that stood in the corner behind her.
Silent awhile were its treadles, at rest was its diligent shuttle,
While the monotonous drone of the wheel, like the drone of a bagpipe,
Followed the old man's songs and united the fragments together.
As in a church, when the chant of the choir at intervals ceases,
Footfalls are heard in the aisles, or words of the priest at the altar,
So, in each pause of the song, with measured motion the clock clicked.

  Thus as they sat, there were footsteps heard, and, suddenly lifted,
Sounded the wooden latch, and the door swung back on its hinges.
Benedict knew by the hob-nailed shoes it was Basil the blacksmith,
And by her beating heart Evangeline knew who was with him.
"Welcome!" the farmer exclaimed, as their footsteps paused on the threshold.
"Welcome, Basil, my friend!  Come, take thy place on the settle
Close by the chimney-side, which is always empty without thee;
Take from the shelf overhead thy pipe and the box of tobacco;
Never so much thyself art thou as when through the curling
Smoke of the pipe or the forge thy friendly and jovial face gleams
Round and red as the harvest moon through the mist of the marshes."
Then, with a smile of content, thus answered Basil the blacksmith,
Taking with easy air the accustomed seat by the fireside:--
"Benedict Bellefontaine, thou hast ever thy jest and thy ballad!
Ever in cheerfullest mood art thou, when others are filled with
Gloomy forebodings of ill, and see only ruin before them.
Happy art thou, as if every day thou hadst picked up a horseshoe."
Pausing a moment, to take the pipe that Evangeline brought him,
And with a coal from the embers had lighted, he slowly continued:--
"Four days now are passed since the English ships at their anchors
Ride in the Gaspereau's mouth, with their cannon pointed against us.
What their design may be is unknown; but all are commanded
On the morrow to meet in the church, where his Majesty's mandate
Will be proclaimed as law in the land.  Alas! in the mean time
Many surmises of evil alarm the hearts of the people."
Then made answer the farmer:--"Perhaps some friendlier purpose
Brings these ships to our shores.  Perhaps the harvests in England
By untimely rains or untimelier heat have been blighted,
And from our bursting barns they would feed their cattle and children."
"Not so thinketh the folk in the village," said, warmly, the blacksmith,
Shaking his head, as in doubt; then, heaving a sigh, he continued:--
"Louisburg is not forgotten, nor Beau Sejour, nor Port Royal.
Many already have fled to the forest, and lurk on its outskirts,
Waiting with anxious hearts the dubious fate of to-morrow.
Arms have been taken from us, and warlike weapons of all kinds;
Nothing is left but the blacksmith's sledge and the scythe of the mower."
Then with a pleasant smile made answer the jovial farmer:--
"Safer are we unarmed, in the midst of our flocks and our cornfields,
Safer within these peaceful dikes, besieged by the ocean,
Than our fathers in forts, besieged by the enemy's cannon.
Fear no evil, my friend, and to-night may no shadow of sorrow
Fall on this house and hearth; for this is the night of the contract.
Built are the house and the barn.  The merry lads of the village
Strongly have built them and well; and, breaking the glebe round about them,
Filled the barn with hay, and the house with food for a twelvemonth.
Rene Leblanc will be here anon, with his papers and inkhorn.
Shall we not then be glad, and rejoice in the joy of our children?"
As apart by the window she stood, with her hand in her lover's,
Blushing Evangeline heard the words that her father had spoken,
And, as they died on his lips, the worthy notary entered.



III

Bent like a laboring oar, that toils in the surf of the ocean,
Bent, but not broken, by age was the form of the notary public;
Shocks of yellow hair, like the silken floss of the maize, hung
Over his shoulders; his forehead was high; and glasses with horn bows
Sat astride on his nose, with a look of wisdom supernal.
Father of twenty children was he, and more than a hundred
Children's children rode on his knee, and heard his great watch tick.
Four long years in the times of the war had he languished a captive,
Suffering much in an old French fort as the friend of the English.
Now, though warier grown, without all guile or suspicion,
Ripe in wisdom was he, but patient, and simple, and childlike.
He was beloved by all, and most of all by the children;
For he told them tales of the Loup-garou in the forest,
And of the goblin that came in the night to water the horses,
And of the white Letiche, the ghost of a child who unchristened
Died, and was doomed to haunt unseen the chambers of children;
And how on Christmas eve the oxen talked in the stable,
And how the fever was cured by a spider shut up in a nutshell,
And of the marvellous powers of four-leaved clover and horseshoes,
With whatsoever else was writ in the lore of the village.
Then up rose from his seat by the fireside Basil the blacksmith,
Knocked from his pipe the ashes, and slowly extending his right hand,
"Father Leblanc," he exclaimed, "thou hast heard the talk in the village,
And, perchance, canst tell us some news of these ships and their errand."
Then with modest demeanor made answer the notary public,--
"Gossip enough have I heard, in sooth, yet am never the wiser;
And what their errand may be I know not better than others.
Yet am I not of those who imagine some evil intention
Brings them here, for we are at peace; and why then molest us?"
"God's name!" shouted the hasty and somewhat irascible blacksmith;
"Must we in all things look for the how, and the why, and the wherefore?
Daily injustice is done, and might is the right of the strongest!"
But, without heeding his warmth, continued the notary public,--
"Man is unjust, but God is just; and finally justice
Triumphs; and well I remember a story, that often consoled me,
When as a captive I lay in the old French fort at Port Royal."
This was the old man's favorite tale, and he loved to repeat it
When his neighbors complained that any injustice was done them.
"Once in an ancient city, whose name I no longer remember,
Raised aloft on a column, a brazen statue of Justice
Stood in the public square, upholding the scales in its left hand,
And in its right a sword, as an emblem that justice presided
Over the laws of the land, and the hearts and homes of the people.
Even the birds had built their nests in the scales of the balance,
Having no fear of the sword that flashed in the sunshine above them.
But in the course of time the laws of the land were corrupted;
Might took the place of right, and the weak were oppressed, and the mighty
Ruled with an iron rod.  Then it chanced in a nobleman's palace
That a necklace of pearls was lost, and erelong a suspicion
Fell on an orphan girl who lived as maid in the household.
She, after form of trial condemned to die on the scaffold,
Patiently met her doom at the foot of the statue of Justice.
As to her Father in heaven her innocent spirit ascended,
Lo! o'er the city a tempest rose; and the bolts of the thunder
Smote the statue of bronze, and hurled in wrath from its left hand
Down on the pavement below the clattering scales of the balance,
And in the hollow thereof was found the nest of a magpie,
Into whose clay-built walls the necklace of pearls was inwoven."
Silenced, but not convinced, when the story was ended, the blacksmith
Stood like a man who fain would speak, but findeth no language;
All his thoughts were congealed into lines on his face, as the vapors
Freeze in fantastic shapes on the window-panes in the winter.

  Then Evangeline lighted the brazen lamp on the table,
Filled, till it overflowed, the pewter tankard with home-brewed
Nut-brown ale, that was famed for its strength in the village of Grand-Pre;
While from his pocket the notary drew his papers and inkhorn,
Wrote with a steady hand the date and the age of the parties,
Naming the dower of the bride in flocks of sheep and in cattle.
Orderly all things proceeded, and duly and well were completed,
And the great seal of the law was set like a sun on the margin.
Then from his leathern pouch the farmer threw on the table
Three times the old man's fee in solid pieces of silver;
And the notary rising, and blessing the bride and the bridegroom,
Lifted aloft the tankard of ale and drank to their welfare.
Wiping the foam from his lip, he solemnly bowed and departed,
While in silence the others sat and mused by the fireside,
Till Evangeline brought the draught-board out of its corner.
Soon was the game begun.  In friendly contention the old men
Laughed at each lucky hit, or unsuccessful manoeuver,
Laughed when a man was crowned, or a breach was made in the king-row
Meanwhile apart, in the twilight gloom of a window's embrasure,
Sat the lovers, and whispered together, beholding the moon rise
Over the pallid sea and the silvery mist of the meadows.
Silently one by one, in the infinite meadows of heaven,
Blossomed the lovely stars, the forget-me-nots of the angels.

  Thus was the evening passed.  Anon the bell from the belfry
Rang out the hour of nine, the village curfew, and straightway
Rose the guests and departed; and silence reigned in the household.
Many a farewell word and sweet good-night on the door-step
Lingered long in Evangeline's heart, and filled it with gladness.
Carefully then were covered the embers that glowed on the hearth-stone,
And on the oaken stairs resounded the tread of the farmer.
Soon with a soundless step the foot of Evangeline followed.
Up the staircase moved a luminous space in the darkness,
Lighted less by the lamp than the shining face of the maiden.
Silent she passed the hall, and entered the door of her chamber.
Simple that chamber was, with its curtains of white, and its clothes-press
Ample and high, on whose spacious shelves were carefully folded
Linen and woollen stuffs, by the hand of Evangeline woven.
This was the precious dower she would bring to her husband in marriage,
Better than flocks and herds, being proofs of her skill as a housewife.
Soon she extinguished her lamp, for the mellow and radiant moonlight
Streamed through the windows, and lighted the room, till the heart of the maiden
Swelled and obeyed its power, like the tremulous tides of the ocean.
Ah! she was fair, exceeding fair to behold, as she stood with
Naked snow-white feet on the gleaming floor of her chamber!
Little she dreamed that below, among the trees of the orchard,
Waited her lover and watched for the gleam of her lamp and her shadow.
Yet were her thoughts of him, and at times a feeling of sadness
Passed o'er her soul, as the sailing shade of clouds in the moonlight
Flitted across the floor and darkened the room for a moment.
And, as she gazed from the window, she saw serenely the moon pass
Forth from the folds of a cloud, and one star follow her footsteps,
As out of Abraham's tent young Ishmael wandered with Hagar!


IV

Pleasantly rose next morn the sun on the village of Grand-Pre.
Pleasantly gleamed in the soft, sweet air the Basin of Minas,
Where the ships, with their wavering shadows, were riding at anchor.
Life had long been astir in the village, and clamorous labor
Knocked with its hundred hands at the golden gates of the morning.
Now from the country around, from the farms and neighboring hamlets,
Came in their holiday dresses the blithe Acadian peasants.
Many a glad good-morrow and jocund laugh from the young folk
Made the bright air brighter, as up from the numerous meadows,
Where no path could be seen but the track of wheels in the greensward,
Group after group appeared, and joined, or passed on the highway.
Long ere noon, in the village all sounds of labor were silenced.
Thronged were the streets with people; and noisy groups at the house-doors
Sat in the cheerful sun, and rejoiced and gossiped together.
Every house was an inn, where all were welcomed and feasted;
For with this simple people, who lived like brothers together,
All things were held in common, and what one had was another's.
Yet under Benedict's roof hospitality seemed more abundant:
For Evangeline stood among the guests of her father;
Bright was her face with smiles, and words of welcome and gladness
Fell from her beautiful lips, and blessed the cup as she gave it.

  Under the open sky, in the odorous air of the orchard,
Stript of its golden fruit, was spread the feast of betrothal.
There in the shade of the porch were the priest and the notary seated;
There good Benedict sat, and sturdy Basil the blacksmith.
Not far withdrawn from these, by the cider-press and the beehives,
Michael the fiddler was placed, with the gayest of hearts and of waistcoats.
Shadow and light from the leaves alternately played on his snow-white
Hair, as it waved in the wind; and the jolly face of the fiddler
Glowed like a living coal when the ashes are blown from the embers.
Gayly the old man sang to the vibrant sound of his fiddle,
Tous les Bourgeois de Chartres, and Le Carillon de Dunkerque,
And anon with his wooden shoes beat time to the music.
Merrily, merrily whirled the wheels of the dizzying dances
Under the orchard-trees and down the path to the meadows;
Old folk and young together, and children mingled among them.
Fairest of all the maids was Evangeline, Benedict's daughter!
Noblest of all the youths was Gabriel, son of the blacksmith!

  So passed the morning away.  And lo! with a summons sonorous
Sounded the bell from its tower, and over the meadows a drum beat.
Thronged erelong was the church with men.  Without, in the churchyard,
Waited the women.  They stood by the graves, and hung on the headstones
Garlands of autumn-leaves and evergreens fresh from the forest.
Then came the guard from the ships, and marching proudly among them
Entered the sacred portal.  With loud and dissonant clangor
Echoed the sound of their brazen drums from ceiling and casement,--
Echoed a moment only, and slowly the ponderous portal
Closed, and in silence the crowd awaited the will of the soldiers.
Then uprose their commander, and spoke from the steps of the altar,
Holding aloft in his hands, with its seals, the royal commission.
"You are convened this day," he said, "by his Majesty's orders.
Clement and kind has he been; but how you have answered his kindness,
Let your own hearts reply!  To my natural make and my temper
Painful the task is I do, which to you I know must be grievous.
Yet must I bow and obey, and deliver the will of our monarch;
Namely, that all your lands, and dwellings, and cattle of all kinds
Forfeited be to the crown; and that you yourselves from this province
Be transported to other lands.  God grant you may dwell there
Ever as faithful subjects, a happy and peaceable people!
Prisoners now I declare you; for such is his Majesty's pleasure!"
As, when the air is serene in the sultry solstice of summer,
Suddenly gathers a storm, and the deadly sling of the hailstones
Beats down the farmer's corn in the field and shatters his windows,
Hiding the sun, and strewing the ground with thatch from the house-roofs,
Bellowing fly the herds, and seek to break their enclosures;
So on the hearts of the people descended the words of the speaker.
Silent a moment they stood in speechless wonder, and then rose
Louder and ever louder a wail of sorrow and anger,
And, by one impulse moved, they madly rushed to the door-way.
Vain was the hope of escape; and cries and fierce imprecations
Rang through the house of prayer; and high o'er the heads of the others
Rose, with his arms uplifted, the figure of Basil the blacksmith,
As, on a stormy sea, a spar is tossed by the billows.
Flushed was his face and distorted with passion; and wildly he shouted,--
"Down with the tyrants of England! we never have sworn them allegiance!
Death to these foreign soldiers, who seize on our homes and our harvests!"
More he fain would have said, but the merciless hand of a soldier
Smote him upon the mouth, and dragged him down to the pavement.

  In the midst of the strife and tumult of angry contention,
Lo! the door of the chancel opened, and Father Felician
Entered, with serious mien, and ascended the steps of the altar.
Raising his reverend hand, with a gesture he awed into silence
All that clamorous throng; and thus he spake to his people;
Deep were his tones and solemn; in accents measured and mournful
Spake he, as, after the tocsin's alarum, distinctly the clock strikes.
"What is this that ye do, my children? what madness has seized you?
Forty years of my life have I labored among you, and taught you,
Not in word alone, but in deed, to love one another!
Is this the fruit of my toils, of my vigils and prayers and privations?
Have you so soon forgotten all lessons of love and forgiveness?
This is the house of the Prince of Peace, and would you profane it
Thus with violent deeds and hearts overflowing with hatred?
Lo! where the crucified Christ from his cross is gazing upon you!
See! in those sorrowful eyes what meekness and holy compassion!
Hark! how those lips still repeat the prayer, 'O Father, forgive them!'
Let us repeat that prayer in the hour when the wicked assail us,
Let us repeat it now, and say, 'O Father, forgive them!'"
Few were his words of rebuke, but deep in the hearts of his people
Sank they, and sobs of contrition succeeded the passionate outbreak,
While they repeated his prayer, and said, "O Father, forgive them!"

  Then came the evening service.  The tapers gleamed from the altar.
Fervent and deep was the voice of the priest and the people responded,
Not with their lips alone, but their hearts; and the Ave Maria
Sang they, and fell on their knees, and their souls, with devotion translated,
Rose on the ardor of prayer, like Elijah ascending to heaven.

  Meanwhile had spread in the village the tidings of ill, and on all sides
Wandered, wailing, from house to house the women and children.
Long at her father's door Evangeline stood, with her right hand
Shielding her eyes from the level rays of the sun, that, descending,
Lighted the village street with mysterious splendor, and roofed each
Peasant's cottage with golden thatch, and emblazoned its windows.
Long within had been spread the snow-white cloth on the table;
There stood the wheaten loaf, and the honey fragrant with wild-flowers;
There stood the tankard of ale, and the cheese fresh brought from the dairy;
And, at the head of the board, the great arm-chair of the farmer.
Thus did Evangeline wait at her father's door, as the sunset
Threw the long shadows of trees o'er the broad ambrosial meadows.
Ah! on her spirit within a deeper shadow had fallen,
And from the fields of her soul a fragrance celestial ascended,--
Charity, meekness, love, and hope, and forgiveness, and patience!
Then, all-forgetful of self, she wandered into the village,
Cheering with looks and words the mournful hearts of the women,
As o'er the darkening fields with lingering steps they departed,
Urged by their household cares, and the weary feet of their children.
Down sank the great red sun, and in golden, glimmering vapors
Veiled the light of his face, like the Prophet descending from Sinai.
Sweetly over the village the bell of the Angelus sounded.

  Meanwhile, amid the gloom, by the church Evangeline lingered.
All was silent within; and in vain at the door and the windows
Stood she, and listened and looked, till, overcome by emotion,
"Gabriel!" cried she aloud with tremulous voice; but no answer
Came from the graves of the dead, nor the gloomier grave of the living.
Slowly at length she returned to the tenantless house of her father.
Smouldered the fire on the hearth, on the board was the supper untasted,
Empty and drear was each room, and haunted with phantoms of terror.
Sadly echoed her step on the stair and the floor of her chamber.
In the dead of the night she heard the disconsolate rain fall
Loud on the withered leaves of the sycamore-tree by the window.
Keenly the lightning flashed; and the voice of the echoing thunder
Told her that God was in heaven, and governed the world he created!
Then she remembered the tale she had heard of the justice of Heaven;
Soothed was her troubled soul, and she peacefully slumbered till morning.


V

Four times the sun had risen and set; and now on the fifth day
Cheerily called the cock to the sleeping maids of the farm-house.
Soon o'er the yellow fields, in silent and mournful procession,
Came from the neighboring hamlets and farms the Acadian women,
Driving in ponderous wains their household goods to the sea-shore,
Pausing and looking back to gaze once more on their dwellings,
Ere they were shut from sight by the winding road and the woodland.
Close at their sides their children ran, and urged on the oxen,
While in their little hands they clasped some fragments of playthings.

  Thus to the Gaspereau's mouth they hurried; and there on the sea-beach
Piled in confusion lay the household goods of the peasants.
All day long between the shore and the ships did the boats ply;
All day long the wains came laboring down from the village.
Late in the afternoon, when the sun was near to his setting,
Echoed far o'er the fields came the roll of drums from the churchyard.
Thither the women and children thronged.  On a sudden the church-doors
Opened, and forth came the guard, and marching in gloomy procession
Followed the long-imprisoned, but patient, Acadian farmers.
Even as pilgrims, who journey afar from their homes and their country,
Sing as they go, and in singing forget they are weary and wayworn,
So with songs on their lips the Acadian peasants descended
Down from the church to the shore, amid their wives and their daughters.
Foremost the young men came; and, raising together their voices,
Sang with tremulous lips a chant of the Catholic Missions:--
"Sacred heart of the Saviour!  O inexhaustible fountain!
Fill our hearts this day with strength and submission and patience!"
Then the old men, as they marched, and the women that stood by the wayside
Joined in the sacred psalm, and the birds in the sunshine above them
Mingled their notes therewith, like voices of spirits departed.

  Half-way down to the shore Evangeline waited in silence,
Not overcome with grief, but strong in the hour of affliction,--
Calmly and sadly she waited, until the procession approached her,
And she beheld the face of Gabriel pale with emotion.
Team then filled her eyes, and, eagerly running to meet him,
Clasped she his hands, and laid her head on his shoulder, and whispered,--
"Gabriel! be of good cheer! for if we love one another
Nothing, in truth, can harm us, whatever mischances may happen!"
Smiling she spake these words; then suddenly paused, for her father
Saw she slowly advancing.  Alas! how changed was his aspect!
Gone was the glow from his cheek, and the fire from his eye, and his footstep
Heavier seemed with the weight of the heavy heart in his bosom.
But with a smile and a sigh, she clasped his neck and embraced him,
Speaking words of endearment where words of comfort availed not.
Thus to the Gaspereau's mouth moved on that mournful procession.

  There disorder prevailed, and the tumult and stir of embarking.
Busily plied the freighted boats; and in the confusion
Wives were torn from their husbands, and mothers, too late, saw their children
Left on the land, extending their arms, with wildest entreaties.
So unto separate ships were Basil and Gabriel carried,
While in despair on the shore Evangeline stood with her father.
Half the task was not done when the sun went down, and the twilight
Deepened and darkened around; and in haste the refluent ocean
Fled away from the shore, and left the line of the sand-beach
Covered with waifs of the tide, with kelp and the slippery sea-weed.
Farther back in the midst of the household goods and the wagons,
Like to a gypsy camp, or a leaguer after a battle,
All escape cut off by the sea, and the sentinels near them,
Lay encamped for the night the houseless Acadian farmers.
Back to its nethermost caves retreated the bellowing ocean,
Dragging adown the beach the rattling pebbles, and leaving
Inland and far up the shore the stranded boats of the sailors.
Then, as the night descended, the herds returned from their pastures;
Sweet was the moist still air with the odor of milk from their udders;
Lowing they waited, and long, at the well-known bars of the farm-yard,--
Waited and looked in vain for the voice and the hand of the milkmaid.
Silence reigned in the streets; from the church no Angelus sounded,
Rose no smoke from the roofs, and gleamed no lights from the windows.

  But on the shores meanwhile the evening fires had been kindled,
Built of the drift-wood thrown on the sands from wrecks in the tempest.
Round them shapes of gloom and sorrowful faces were gathered,
Voices of women were heard, and of men, and the crying of children.
Onward from fire to fire, as from hearth to hearth in his parish,
Wandered the faithful priest, consoling and blessing and cheering,
Like unto shipwrecked Paul on Melita's desolate sea-shore.
Thus he approached the place where Evangeline sat with her father,
And in the flickering light beheld the face of the old man,
Haggard and hollow and wan, and without either thought or emotion,
E'en as the face of a clock from which the hands have been taken.
Vainly Evangeline strove with words and caresses to cheer him,
Vainly offered him food; yet he moved not, he looked not, he spake not
But, with a vacant stare, ever gazed at the flickering fire-light.
"Benedicite!" murmured the priest, in tones of compassion.
More he fain would have said, but his heart was full, and his accents
Faltered and paused on his lips, as the feet of a child on a threshold,
Hushed by the scene he beholds, and the awful presence of sorrow.
Silently, therefore, he laid his hand on the head of the maiden,
Raising his tearful eyes to the silent stars that above them
Moved on their way, unperturbed by the wrongs and sorrows of mortals.
Then sat he down at her side, and they wept together in silence.

  Suddenly rose from the south a light, as in autumn the blood-red
Moon climbs the crystal walls of heaven, and o'er the horizon
Titan-like stretches its hundred hands upon mountain and meadow,
Seizing the rocks and the rivers, and piling huge shadows together.
Broader and ever broader it gleamed on the roofs of the village,
Gleamed on the sky and the sea, and the ships that lay in the roadstead.
Columns of shining smoke uprose, and flashes of flame were
Thrust through their folds and withdrawn, like the quivering hands of a martyr.
Then as the wind seized the gleeds and the burning thatch, and, uplifting,
Whirled them aloft through the air, at once from a hundred house-tops
Started the sheeted smoke with flashes of flame intermingled.

  These things beheld in dismay the crowd on the shore and on shipboard.
Speechless at first they stood, then cried aloud in their anguish,
"We shall behold no more our homes in the village of Grand-Pre!"
Loud on a sudden the cocks began to crow in the farm-yards,
Thinking the day had dawned; and anon the lowing of cattle
Came on the evening breeze, by the barking of dogs interrupted.
Then rose a sound of dread, such as startles the sleeping encampments
Far in the western prairies or forests that skirt the Nebraska,
When the wild horses affrighted sweep by with the speed of the whirlwind,
Or the loud bellowing herds of buffaloes rush to the river.
Such was the sound that arose on the night, as the herds and the horses
Broke through their folds and fences, and madly rushed o'er the meadows.

  Overwhelmed with the sight, yet speechless, the priest and the maiden
Gazed on the scene of terror that reddened and widened before them;
And as they turned at length to speak to their silent companion,
Lo! from his seat he had fallen, and stretched abroad on the sea-shore
Motionless lay his form, from which the soul had departed.
Slowly the priest uplifted the lifeless head, and the maiden
Knelt at her father's side, and wailed aloud in her terror.
Then in a swoon she sank, and lay with her head on his bosom.
Through the long night she lay in deep, oblivious slumber;
And when she woke from the trance, she beheld a multitude near her.
Faces of friends she beheld, that were mournfully gazing upon her,
Pallid, with tearful eyes, and looks of saddest compassion.
Still the blaze of the burning village illumined the landscape,
Reddened the sky overhead, and gleamed on the faces around her,
And like the day of doom it seemed to her wavering senses.
Then a familiar voice she heard, as it said to the people,--
"Let us bury him here by the sea.  When a happier season
Brings us again to our homes from the unknown land of our exile,
Then shall his sacred dust be piously laid in the churchyard."
Such were the words of the priest.  And there in haste by the sea-side,
Having the glare of the burning village for funeral torches,
But without bell or book, they buried the farmer of Grand-Pre.
And as the voice of the priest repeated the service of sorrow,
Lo! with a mournful sound, like the voice of a vast congregation,
Solemnly answered the sea, and mingled its roar with the dirges.
'T was the returning tide, that afar from the waste of the ocean,
With the first dawn of the day, came heaving and hurrying landward.
Then recommenced once more the stir and noise of embarking;
And with the ebb of the tide the ships sailed out of the harbor,
Leaving behind them the dead on the shore, and the village in ruins.



PART THE SECOND

I

Many a weary year had passed since the burning of Grand-Pre,
When on the falling tide the freighted vessels departed,
Bearing a nation, with all its household gods, into exile.
Exile without an end, and without an example in story.
Far asunder, on separate coasts, the Acadians landed;
Scattered were they, like flakes of snow, when the wind from the northeast
Strikes aslant through the fogs that darken the Banks of Newfoundland.
Friendless, homeless, hopeless, they wandered from city to city,
From the cold lakes of the North to sultry Southern savannas,--
From the bleak shores of the sea to the lands where the Father of Waters
Seizes the hills in his hands, and drags them down to the ocean,
Deep in their sands to bury the scattered bones of the mammoth.
Friends they sought and homes; and many, despairing, heart-broken,
Asked of the earth but a grave, and no longer a friend nor a fireside.
Written their history stands on tablets of stone in the churchyards.
Long among them was seen a maiden who waited and wandered,
Lowly and meek in spirit, and patiently suffering all things.
Fair was she and young; but, alas! before her extended,
Dreary and vast and silent, the desert of life, with its pathway
Marked by the graves of those who had sorrowed and suffered before her,
Passions long extinguished, and hopes long dead and abandoned,
As the emigrant's way o'er the Western desert is marked by
Camp-fires long consumed, and bones that bleach in the sunshine.
Something there was in her life incomplete, imperfect, unfinished;
As if a morning of June, with all its music and sunshine,
Suddenly paused in the sky, and, fading, slowly descended
Into the east again, from whence it late had arisen.
Sometimes she lingered in towns, till, urged by the fever within her,
Urged by a restless longing, the hunger and thirst of the spirit,
She would commence again her endless search and endeavor;
Sometimes in churchyards strayed, and gazed on the crosses and tombstones,
Sat by some nameless grave, and thought that perhaps in its bosom
He was already at rest, and she longed to slumber beside him.
Sometimes a rumor, a hearsay, an inarticulate whisper,
Came with its airy hand to point and beckon her forward.
Sometimes she spake with those who had seen her beloved and known him,
But it was long ago, in some far-off place or forgotten.
"Gabriel Lajeunesse!" they said; "yes! we have seen him.
He was with Basil the blacksmith, and both have gone to the prairies;
Coureurs-des-Bois are they, and famous hunters and trappers."
"Gabriel Lajeunesse!" said others; "O yes! we have seen him.
He is a Voyageur in the lowlands of Louisiana."
Then would they say, "Dear child! why dream and wait for him longer?
Are there not other youths as fair as Gabriel? others
Who have hearts as tender and true, and spirits as loyal?
Here is Baptiste Leblanc, the notary's son, who has loved thee
Many a tedious year; come, give him thy hand and be happy!
Thou art too fair to be left to braid St. Catherine's tresses."
Then would Evangeline answer, serenely but sadly, "I cannot!
Whither my heart has gone, there follows my hand, and not elsewhere.
For when the heart goes before, like a lamp, and illumines the pathway,
Many things are made clear, that else lie hidden in darkness."
Thereupon the priest, her friend and father-confessor,
Said, with a smile, "O daughter! thy God thus speaketh within thee!
Talk not of wasted affection, affection never was wasted;
If it enrich not the heart of another, its waters, returning
Back to their springs, like the rain, shall fill them full of refreshment;
That which the fountain sends forth returns again to the fountain.
Patience; accomplish thy labor; accomplish thy work of affection!
Sorrow and silence are strong, and patient endurance is godlike.
Therefore accomplish thy labor of love, till the heart is made godlike,
Purified, strengthened, perfected, and rendered more worthy of heaven!"
Cheered by the good man's words, Evangeline labored and waited.
Still in her heart she heard the funeral dirge of the ocean,
But with its sound there was mingled a voice that whispered, "Despair not?"
Thus did that poor soul wander in want and cheerless discomfort
Bleeding, barefooted, over the shards and thorns of existence.
Let me essay, O Muse! to follow the wanderer's footsteps;--
Not through each devious path, each changeful year of existence;
But as a traveller follows a streamlet's course through the valley:
Far from its margin at times, and seeing the gleam of its water
Here and there, in some open space, and at intervals only;
Then drawing nearer its banks, through sylvan glooms that conceal it,
Though he behold it not, he can hear its continuous murmur;
Happy, at length, if he find the spot where it reaches an outlet.



II

It was the month of May.  Far down the Beautiful River,
Past the Ohio shore and past the mouth of the Wabash,
Into the golden stream of the broad and swift Mississippi,
Floated a cumbrous boat, that was rowed by Acadian boatmen.
It was a band of exiles: a raft, as it were, from the shipwrecked
Nation, scattered along the coast, now floating together,
Bound by the bonds of a common belief and a common misfortune;
Men and women and children, who, guided by hope or by hearsay,
Sought for their kith and their kin among the few-acred farmers
On the Acadian coast, and the prairies of fair Opelousas.
With them Evangeline went, and her guide, the Father Felician.
Onward o'er sunken sands, through a wilderness sombre with forests,
Day after day they glided adown the turbulent river;
Night after night, by their blazing fires, encamped on its borders.
Now through rushing chutes, among green islands, where plumelike
Cotton-trees nodded their shadowy crests, they swept with the current,
Then emerged into broad lagoons, where silvery sand-bars
Lay in the stream, and along the wimpling waves of their margin,
Shining with snow-white plumes, large flocks of pelicans waded.
Level the landscape grew, and along the shores of the river,
Shaded by china-trees, in the midst of luxuriant gardens,
Stood the houses of planters, with negro-cabins and dove-cots.
They were approaching the region where reigns perpetual summer,
Where through the Golden Coast, and groves of orange and citron,
Sweeps with majestic curve the river away to the eastward.
They, too, swerved from their course; and, entering the Bayou of Plaquemine,
Soon were lost in a maze of sluggish and devious waters,
Which, like a network of steel, extended in every direction.
Over their heads the towering and tenebrous boughs of the cypress
Met in a dusky arch, and trailing mosses in mid-air
Waved like banners that hang on the walls of ancient cathedrals.
Deathlike the silence seemed, and unbroken, save by the herons
Home to their roasts in the cedar-trees returning at sunset,
Or by the owl, as he greeted the moon with demoniac laughter.
Lovely the moonlight was as it glanced and gleamed on the water,
Gleamed on the columns of cypress and cedar sustaining the arches,
Down through whose broken vaults it fell as through chinks in a ruin.
Dreamlike, and indistinct, and strange were all things around them;
And o'er their spirits there came a feeling of wonder and sadness,--
Strange forebodings of ill, unseen and that cannot be compassed.
As, at the tramp of a horse's hoof on the turf of the prairies,
Far in advance are closed the leaves of the shrinking mimosa,
So, at the hoof-beats of fate, with sad forebodings of evil,
Shrinks and closes the heart, ere the stroke of doom has attained it.
But Evangeline's heart was sustained by a vision, that faintly
Floated before her eyes, and beckoned her on through the moonlight.
It was the thought of her brain that assumed the shape of a phantom.
Through those shadowy aisles had Gabriel wandered before her,
And every stroke of the oar now brought him nearer and nearer.

  Then in his place, at the prow of the boat, rose one of the oarsmen,
And, as a signal sound, if others like them peradventure
Sailed on those gloomy and midnight streams, blew a blast on his bugle.
Wild through the dark colonnades and corridors leafy the blast rang,
Breaking the seal of silence, and giving tongues to the forest.
Soundless above them the banners of moss just stirred to the music.
Multitudinous echoes awoke and died in the distance,
Over the watery floor, and beneath the reverberant branches;
But not a voice replied; no answer came from the darkness;
And, when the echoes had ceased, like a sense of pain was the silence.
Then Evangeline slept; but the boatmen rowed through the midnight,
Silent at times, then singing familiar Canadian boat-songs,
Such as they sang of old on their own Acadian rivers,
While through the night were heard the mysterious sounds of the desert,
Far off,--indistinct,--as of wave or wind in the forest,
Mixed with the whoop of the crane and the roar of the grim alligator.

  Thus ere another noon they emerged from the shades; and before them
Lay, in the golden sun, the lakes of the Atchafalaya.
Water-lilies in myriads rocked on the slight undulations
Made by the passing oars, and, resplendent in beauty, the lotus
Lifted her golden crown above the heads of the boatmen.
Faint was the air with the odorous breath of magnolia blossoms,
And with the heat of noon; and numberless sylvan islands,
Fragrant and thickly embowered with blossoming hedges of roses,
Near to whose shores they glided along, invited to slumber.
Soon by the fairest of these their weary oars were suspended.
Under the boughs of Wachita willows, that grew by the margin,
Safely their boat was moored; and scattered about on the greensward,
Tired with their midnight toil, the weary travellers slumbered.
Over them vast and high extended the cope of a cedar.
Swinging from its great arms, the trumpet-flower and the grapevine
Hung their ladder of ropes aloft like the ladder of Jacob,
On whose pendulous stairs the angels ascending, descending,
Were the swift humming-birds, that flitted from blossom to blossom.
Such was the vision Evangeline saw as she slumbered beneath it.
Filled was her heart with love, and the dawn of an opening heaven
Lighted her soul in sleep with the glory of regions celestial.

  Nearer, ever nearer, among the numberless islands,
Darted a light, swift boat, that sped away o'er the water,
Urged on its course by the sinewy arms of hunters and trappers.
Northward its prow was turned, to the land of the bison and beaver.
At the helm sat a youth, with countenance thoughtful and careworn.
Dark and neglected locks overshadowed his brow, and a sadness
Somewhat beyond his years on his face was legibly written.
Gabriel was it, who, weary with waiting, unhappy and restless,
Sought in the Western wilds oblivion of self and of sorrow.
Swiftly they glided along, close under the lee of the island,
But by the opposite bank, and behind a screen of palmettos,
So that they saw not the boat, where it lay concealed in the willows,
All undisturbed by the dash of their oars, and unseen, were the sleepers,
Angel of God was there none to awaken the slumbering maiden.
Swiftly they glided away, like the shade of a cloud on the prairie.
After the sound of their oars on the tholes had died in the distance,
As from a magic trance the sleepers awoke, and the maiden
Said with a sigh to the friendly priest, "O Father Felician!
Something says in my heart that near me Gabriel wanders.
Is it a foolish dream, an idle and vague superstition?
Or has an angel passed, and revealed the truth to my spirit?"
Then, with a blush, she added, "Alas for my credulous fancy!
Unto ears like thine such words as these have no meaning."
But made answer the reverend man, and he smiled as he answered,--
"Daughter, thy words are not idle; nor are they to me without meaning.
Feeling is deep and still; and the word that floats on the surface
Is as the tossing buoy, that betrays where the anchor is hidden.
Therefore trust to thy heart, and to what the world calls illusions.
Gabriel truly is near thee; for not far away to the southward,
On the banks of the Teche, are the towns of St. Maur and St. Martin.
There the long-wandering bride shall be given again to her bridegroom,
There the long-absent pastor regain his flock and his sheepfold.
Beautiful is the land, with its prairies and forests of fruit-trees;
Under the feet a garden of flowers, and the bluest of heavens
Bending above, and resting its dome on the walls of the forest.
They who dwell there have named it the Eden of Louisiana."

  With these words of cheer they arose and continued their journey.
Softly the evening came.  The sun from the western horizon
Like a magician extended his golden wand o'er the landscape;
Twinkling vapors arose; and sky and water and forest
Seemed all on fire at the touch, and melted and mingled together.
Hanging between two skies, a cloud with edges of silver,
Floated the boat, with its dripping oars, on the motionless water.
Filled was Evangeline's heart with inexpressible sweetness.
Touched by the magic spell, the sacred fountains of feeling
Glowed with the light of love, as the skies and waters around her.
Then from a neighboring thicket the mocking-bird, wildest of singers,
Swinging aloft on a willow spray that hung o'er the water,
Shook from his little throat such floods of delirious music,
That the whole air and the woods and the waves seemed silent to listen.
Plaintive at first were the tones and sad; then soaring to madness
Seemed they to follow or guide the revel of frenzied Bacchantes.
Single notes were then heard, in sorrowful, low lamentation;
Till, having gathered them all, he flung them abroad in derision,
As when, after a storm, a gust of wind through the tree-tops
Shakes down the rattling rain in a crystal shower on the branches.
With such a prelude as this, and hearts that throbbed with emotion,
Slowly they entered the Teche, where it flows through the green Opelousas,
And, through the amber air, above the crest of the woodland,
Saw the column of smoke that arose from a neighboring dwelling;--
Sounds of a horn they heard, and the distant lowing of cattle.

III

Near to the bank of the river, o'ershadowed by oaks, from whose branches
Garlands of Spanish moss and of mystic mistletoe flaunted,
Such as the Druids cut down with golden hatchets at Yule-tide,
Stood, secluded and still, the house of the herdsman.  A garden
Girded it round about with a belt of luxuriant blossoms,
Filling the air with fragrance.  The house itself was of timbers
Hewn from the cypress-tree, and carefully fitted together.
Large and low was the roof; and on slender columns supported,
Rose-wreathed, vine-encircled, a broad and spacious veranda,
Haunt of the humming-bird and the bee, extended around it.
At each end of the house, amid the flowers of the garden,
Stationed the dove-cots were, as love's perpetual symbol,
Scenes of endless wooing, and endless contentions of rivals.
Silence reigned o'er the place.  The line of shadow and sunshine
Ran near the tops of the trees; but the house itself was in shadow,
And from its chimney-top, ascending and slowly expanding
Into the evening air, a thin blue column of smoke rose.
In the rear of the house, from the garden gate, ran a pathway
Through the great groves of oak to the skirts of the limitless prairie,
Into whose sea of flowers the sun was slowly descending.
Full in his track of light, like ships with shadowy canvas
Hanging loose from their spars in a motionless calm in the tropics,
Stood a cluster of trees, with tangled cordage of grapevines.

  Just where the woodlands met the flowery surf of the prairie,
Mounted upon his horse, with Spanish saddle and stirrups,
Sat a herdsman, arrayed in gaiters and doublet of deerskin.
Broad and brown was the face that from under the Spanish sombrero
Gazed on the peaceful scene, with the lordly look of its master.
Round about him were numberless herds of kine, that were grazing
Quietly in the meadows, and breathing the vapory freshness
That uprose from the river, and spread itself over the landscape.
Slowly lifting the horn that hung at his side, and expanding
Fully his broad, deep chest, he blew a blast, that resounded
Wildly and sweet and far, through the still damp air of the evening.
Suddenly out of the grass the long white horns of the cattle
Rose like flakes of foam on the adverse currents of ocean.
Silent a moment they gazed, then bellowing rushed o'er the prairie,
And the whole mass became a cloud, a shade in the distance.
Then, as the herdsman turned to the house, through the gate of the garden
Saw he the forms of the priest and the maiden advancing to meet him.
Suddenly down from his horse he sprang in amazement, and forward
Rushed with extended arms and exclamations of wonder;
When they beheld his face, they recognized Basil the blacksmith.
Hearty his welcome was, as he led his guests to the garden.
There in an arbor of roses with endless question and answer
Gave they vent to their hearts, and renewed their friendly embraces,
Laughing and weeping by turns, or sitting silent and thoughtful.
Thoughtful, for Gabriel came not; and now dark doubts and misgivings
Stole o'er the maiden's heart; and Basil, somewhat embarrassed,
Broke the silence and said, "If you came by the Atchafalaya,
How have you nowhere encountered my Gabriel's boat on the bayous?"
Over Evangeline's face at the words of Basil a shade passed.
Tears came into her eyes, and she said, with a tremulous accent,
"Gone? is Gabriel gone?" and, concealing her face on his shoulder,
All her o'erburdened heart gave way, and she wept and lamented.
Then the good Basil said,--and his voice grew blithe as he said it,--
"Be of good cheer, my child; it is only to-day he departed.
Foolish boy! he has left me alone with my herds and my horses.
Moody and restless grown, and tried and troubled, his spirit
Could no longer endure the calm of this quiet existence.
Thinking ever of thee, uncertain and sorrowful ever,
Ever silent, or speaking only of thee and his troubles,
He at length had become so tedious to men and to maidens,
Tedious even to me, that at length I bethought me, and sent him
Unto the town of Adayes to trade for mules with the Spaniards.
Thence he will follow the Indian trails to the Ozark Mountains,
Hunting for furs in the forests, on rivers trapping the beaver.
Therefore be of good cheer; we will follow the fugitive lover;
He is not far on his way, and the Fates and the streams are against him.
Up and away to-morrow, and through the red dew of the morning
We will follow him fast, and bring him back to his prison."

  Then glad voices were heard, and up from the banks of the river,
Borne aloft on his comrades' arms, came Michael the fiddler.
Long under Basil's roof had he lived like a god on Olympus,
Having no other care than dispensing music to mortals.
Far renowned was he for his silver locks and his fiddle.
"Long live Michael," they cried, "our brave Acadian minstrel!"
As they bore him aloft in triumphal procession; and straightway
Father Felician advanced with Evangeline, greeting the old man
Kindly and oft, and recalling the past, while Basil, enraptured,
Hailed with hilarious joy his old companions and gossips,
Laughing loud and long, and embracing mothers and daughters.
Much they marvelled to see the wealth of the cidevant blacksmith,
All his domains and his herds, and his patriarchal demeanor;
Much they marvelled to hear his tales of the soil and the climate,
And of the prairie; whose numberless herds were his who would take them;
Each one thought in his heart, that he, too, would go and do likewise.
Thus they ascended the steps, and, crossing the breezy veranda,
Entered the hall of the house, where already the supper of Basil
Waited his late return; and they rested and feasted together.

  Over the joyous feast the sudden darkness descended.
All was silent without, and, illuming the landscape with silver,
Fair rose the dewy moon and the myriad stars; but within doors,
Brighter than these, shone the faces of friends in the glimmering lamplight.
Then from his station aloft, at the head of the table, the herdsman
Poured forth his heart and his wine together in endless profusion.
Lighting his pipe, that was filled with sweet Natchitoches tobacco,
Thus he spake to his guests, who listened, and smiled as they listened:--
"Welcome once more, my friends, who long have been friendless and homeless,
Welcome once more to a home, that is better perchance than the old one!
Here no hungry winter congeals our blood like the rivers;
Here no stony ground provokes the wrath of the farmer.
Smoothly the ploughshare runs through the soil, as a keel through the water.
All the year round the orange-groves are in blossom; and grass grows
More in a single night than a whole Canadian summer.
Here, too, numberless herds run wild and unclaimed in the prairies;
Here, too, lands may be had for the asking, and forests of timber
With a few blows of the axe are hewn and framed into houses.
After your houses are built, and your fields are yellow with harvests,
No King George of England shall drive you away from your homesteads,
Burning your dwellings and barns, and stealing your farms and your cattle."
Speaking these words, he blew a wrathful cloud from his nostrils,
While his huge, brown hand came thundering down on the table,
So that the guests all started; and Father Felician, astounded,
Suddenly paused, with a pinch of snuff half-way to his nostrils.
But the brave Basil resumed, and his words were milder and gayer:--
"Only beware of the fever, my friends, beware of the fever!
For it is not like that of our cold Acadian climate,
Cured by wearing a spider hung round one's neck in a nutshell!"
Then there were voices heard at the door, and footsteps approaching
Sounded upon the stairs and the floor of the breezy veranda.
It was the neighboring Creoles and small Acadian planters,
Who had been summoned all to the house of Basil the Herdsman.
Merry the meeting was of ancient comrades and neighbors:
Friend clasped friend in his arms; and they who before were as strangers,
Meeting in exile, became straightway as friends to each other,
Drawn by the gentle bond of a common country together.
But in the neighboring hall a strain of music, proceeding
From the accordant strings of Michael's melodious fiddle,
Broke up all further speech.  Away, like children delighted,
All things forgotten beside, they gave themselves to the maddening
Whirl of the dizzy dance, as it swept and swayed to the music,
Dreamlike, with beaming eyes and the rush of fluttering garments.

  Meanwhile, apart, at the head of the hall, the priest and the herdsman
Sat, conversing together of past and present and future;
While Evangeline stood like one entranced, for within her
Olden memories rose, and loud in the midst of the music
Heard she the sound of the sea, and an irrepressible sadness
Came o'er her heart, and unseen she stole forth into the garden.
Beautiful was the night.  Behind the black wall of the forest,
Tipping its summit with silver, arose the moon.  On the river
Fell here and there through the branches a tremulous gleam of the moonlight,
Like the sweet thoughts of love on a darkened and devious spirit.
Nearer and round about her, the manifold flowers of the garden
Poured out their souls in odors, that were their prayers and confessions
Unto the night, as it went its way, like a silent Carthusian.
Fuller of fragrance than they, and as heavy with shadows and night-dews,
Hung the heart of the maiden.  The calm and the magical moonlight
Seemed to inundate her soul with indefinable longing;
As, through the garden gate, and beneath the shade of the oak-trees,
Passed she along the path to the edge of the measureless prairie.
Silent it lay, with a silvery haze upon it, and fire-flies
Gleaming and floating away in mingled and infinite numbers.
Over her head the stars, the thoughts of God in the heavens,
Shone on the eyes of man who had ceased to marvel and worship,
Save when a blazing comet was seen on the walls of that temple,
As if a hand had appeared and written upon them, "Upharsin."
And the soul of the maiden, between the stars and the fire-flies,
Wandered alone, and she cried, "O Gabriel!  O my beloved!
Art thou so near unto me, and yet I cannot behold thee?
Art thou so near unto me, and yet thy voice does not reach me?
Ah! how often thy feet have trod this path to the prairie!
Ah! how often thine eyes have looked on the woodlands around me!
Ah! how often beneath this oak, returning from labor,
Thou hast lain down to rest and to dream of me in thy slumbers!
When shall these eyes behold, these arms be folded about thee?"
Loud and sudden and near the note of a whippoorwill sounded
Like a flute in the woods; and anon, through the neighboring thickets,
Farther and farther away it floated and dropped into silence.
"Patience!" whispered the oaks from oracular caverns of darkness:
And, from the moonlit meadow, a sigh responded, "To-morrow!"

  Bright rose the sun next day; and all the flowers of the garden
Bathed his shining feet with their tears, and anointed his tresses
With the delicious balm that they bore in their vases of crystal.
"Farewell!" said the priest, as he stood at the shadowy threshold;
"See that you bring us the Prodigal Son from his fasting and famine,
And, too, the Foolish Virgin, who slept when the bridegroom was coming."
"Farewell!" answered the maiden, and, smiling, with Basil descended
Down to the river's brink, where the boatmen already were waiting.
Thus beginning their journey with morning, and sunshine, and gladness,
Swiftly they followed the flight of him who was speeding before them,
Blown by the blast of fate like a dead leaf over the desert.
Not that day, nor the next, nor yet the day that succeeded,
Found they trace of his course, in lake or forest or river,
Nor, after many days, had they found him; but vague and uncertain
Rumors alone were their guides through a wild and desolate Country;
Till, at the little inn of the Spanish town of Adayes,
Weary and worn, they alighted, and learned from the garrulous landlord,
That on the day before, with horses and guides and companions,
Gabriel left the village, and took the road of the prairies.



IV

Far in the West there lies a desert land, where the mountains
Lift, through perpetual snows, their lofty and luminous summits.
Down from their jagged, deep ravines, where the gorge, like a gateway,
Opens a passage rude to the wheels of the emigrant's wagon,
Westward the Oregon flows and the Walleway and Owyhee.
Eastward, with devious course, among the Wind-river Mountains,
Through the Sweet-water Valley precipitate leaps the Nebraska;
And to the south, from Fontaine-qui-bout and the Spanish sierras,
Fretted with sands and rocks, and swept by the wind of the desert,
Numberless torrents, with ceaseless sound, descend to the ocean,
Like the great chords of a harp, in loud and solemn vibrations.
Spreading between these streams are the wondrous, beautiful prairies,
Billowy bays of grass ever rolling in shadow and sunshine,
Bright with luxuriant clusters of roses and purple amorphas.
Over them wandered the buffalo herds, and the elk and the roebuck;
Over them wandered the wolves, and herds of riderless horses;
Fires that blast and blight, and winds that are weary with travel;
Over them wander the scattered tribes of Ishmael's children,
Staining the desert with blood; and above their terrible war-trails
Circles and sails aloft, on pinions majestic, the vulture,
Like the implacable soul of a chieftain slaughtered in battle,
By invisible stairs ascending and scaling the heavens.
Here and there rise smokes from the camps of these savage marauders;
Here and there rise groves from the margins of swift-running rivers;
And the grim, taciturn bear, the anchorite monk of the desert,
Climbs down their dark ravines to dig for roots by the brook-side,
And over all is the sky, the clear and crystalline heaven,
Like the protecting hand of God inverted above them.

  Into this wonderful land, at the base of the Ozark Mountains,
Gabriel far had entered, with hunters and trappers behind him.
Day after day, with their Indian guides, the maiden and Basil
Followed his flying steps, and thought each day to o'ertake him.
Sometimes they saw, or thought they saw, the smoke of his camp-fire
Rise in the morning air from the distant plain; but at nightfall,
When they had reached the place, they found only embers and ashes.
And, though their hearts were sad at times and their bodies were weary,
Hope still guided them on, as the magic Fata Morgana
Showed them her lakes of light, that retreated and vanished before them.

  Once, as they sat by their evening fire, there silently entered
Into the little camp an Indian woman, whose features
Wore deep traces of sorrow, and patience as great as her sorrow.
She was a Shawnee woman returning home to her people,
From the far-off hunting-grounds of the cruel Camanches,
Where her Canadian husband, a Coureur-des-Bois, had been murdered.
Touched were their hearts at her story, and warmest and friendliest welcome
Gave they, with words of cheer, and she sat and feasted among them
On the buffalo-meat and the venison cooked on the embers.
But when their meal was done, and Basil and all his companions,
Worn with the long day's march and the chase of the deer and the bison,
Stretched themselves on the ground, and slept where the quivering fire-light
Flashed on their swarthy cheeks, and their forms wrapped up in their blankets
Then at the door of Evangeline's tent she sat and repeated
Slowly, with soft, low voice, and the charm of her Indian accent,
All the tale of her love, with its pleasures, and pains, and reverses.
Much Evangeline wept at the tale, and to know that another
Hapless heart like her own had loved and had been disappointed.
Moved to the depths of her soul by pity and woman's compassion,
Yet in her sorrow pleased that one who had suffered was near her,
She in turn related her love and all its disasters.
Mute with wonder the Shawnee sat, and when she had ended
Still was mute; but at length, as if a mysterious horror
Passed through her brain, she spake, and repeated the tale of the Mowis;
Mowis, the bridegroom of snow, who won and wedded a maiden,
But, when the morning came, arose and passed from the wigwam,
Fading and melting away and dissolving into the sunshine,
Till she beheld him no more, though she followed far into the forest.
Then, in those sweet, low tones, that seemed like a weird incantation,
Told she the tale of the fair Lilinau, who was wooed by a phantom,
That, through the pines o'er her father's lodge, in the hush of the twilight,
Breathed like the evening wind, and whispered love to the maiden,
Till she followed his green and waving plume through the forest,
And nevermore returned, nor was seen again by her people.
Silent with wonder and strange surprise, Evangeline listened
To the soft flow of her magical words, till the region around her
Seemed like enchanted ground, and her swarthy guest the enchantress.
Slowly over the tops of the Ozark Mountains the moon rose,
Lighting the little tent, and with a mysterious splendor
Touching the sombre leaves, and embracing and filling the woodland.
With a delicious sound the brook rushed by, and the branches
Swayed and sighed overhead in scarcely audible whispers.
Filled with the thoughts of love was Evangeline's heart, but a secret,
Subtile sense crept in of pain and indefinite terror,
As the cold, poisonous snake creeps into the nest of the swallow.
It was no earthly fear.  A breath from the region of spirits
Seemed to float in the air of night; and she felt for a moment
That, like the Indian maid, she, too, was pursuing a phantom.
With this thought she slept, and the fear and the phantom had vanished.

  Early upon the morrow the march was resumed; and the Shawnee
Said, as they journeyed along, "On the western slope of these mountains
Dwells in his little village the Black Robe chief of the Mission.
Much he teaches the people, and tells them of Mary and Jesus;
Loud laugh their hearts with joy, and weep with pain, as they hear him."
Then, with a sudden and secret emotion, Evangeline answered,
"Let us go to the Mission, for there good tidings await us!"
Thither they turned their steeds; and behind a spur of the mountains,
Just as the sun went down, they heard a murmur of voices,
And in a meadow green and broad, by the bank of a river,
Saw the tents of the Christians, the tents of the Jesuit Mission.
Under a towering oak, that stood in the midst of the village,
Knelt the Black Robe chief with his children.  A crucifix fastened
High on the trunk of the tree, and overshadowed by grapevines,
Looked with its agonized face on the multitude kneeling beneath it.
This was their rural chapel.  Aloft, through the intricate arches
Of its aerial roof, arose the chant of their vespers,
Mingling its notes with the soft susurrus and sighs of the branches.
Silent, with heads uncovered, the travellers, nearer approaching,
Knelt on the swarded floor, and joined in the evening devotions.
But when the service was done, and the benediction had fallen
Forth from the hands of the priest, like seed from the hands of the sower,
Slowly the reverend man advanced to the strangers, and bade them
Welcome; and when they replied, he smiled with benignant expression,
Hearing the homelike sounds of his mother-tongue in the forest,
And, with words of kindness, conducted them into his wigwam.
There upon mats and skins they reposed, and on cakes of the maize-ear
Feasted, and slaked their thirst from the water-gourd of the teacher.
Soon was their story told; and the priest with solemnity answered:--
"Not six suns have risen and set since Gabriel, seated
On this mat by my side, where now the maiden reposes,
Told me this same sad tale then arose and continued his journey!"
Soft was the voice of the priest, and he spake with an accent of kindness;
But on Evangeline's heart fell his words as in winter the snow-flakes
Fall into some lone nest from which the birds have departed.
"Far to the north he has gone," continued the priest; "but in autumn,
When the chase is done, will return again to the Mission."
Then Evangeline said, and her voice was meek and submissive,
"Let me remain with thee, for my soul is sad and afflicted."
So seemed it wise and well unto all; and betimes on the morrow,
Mounting his Mexican steed, with his Indian guides and companions.
Homeward Basil returned, and Evangeline stayed at the Mission.

  Slowly, slowly, slowly the days succeeded each other,--
Days and weeks and months; and the fields of maize that were springing
Green from the ground when a stranger she came, now waving above her,
Lifted their slender shafts, with leaves interlacing, and forming
Cloisters for mendicant crows and granaries pillaged by squirrels.
Then in the golden weather the maize was husked, and the maidens
Blushed at each blood-red ear, for that betokened a lover,
But at the crooked laughed, and called it a thief in the corn-field.
Even the blood-red ear to Evangeline brought not her lover.
"Patience!" the priest would say; "have faith, and thy prayer will be answered!
Look at this vigorous plant that lifts its head from the meadow,
See how its leaves are turned to the north, as true as the magnet;
This is the compass-flower, that the finger of God has planted
Here in the houseless wild, to direct the traveller's journey
Over the sea-like, pathless, limitless waste of the desert.
Such in the soul of man is faith.  The blossoms of passion,
Gay and luxuriant flowers, are brighter and fuller of fragrance,
But they beguile us, and lead us astray, and their odor is deadly.
Only this humble plant can guide us here, and hereafter
Crown us with asphodel flowers, that are wet with the dews of nepenthe."

  So came the autumn, and passed, and the winter,--yet Gabriel came not;
Blossomed the opening spring, and the notes of the robin and bluebird
Sounded sweet upon wold and in wood, yet Gabriel came not.
But on the breath of the summer winds a rumor was wafted
Sweeter than song of bird, or hue or odor of blossom.
Far to the north and east, it said, in the Michigan forests,
Gabriel had his lodge by the banks of the Saginaw River,
And, with returning guides, that sought the lakes of St. Lawrence,
Saying a sad farewell, Evangeline went from the Mission.
When over weary ways, by long and perilous marches,
She had attained at length the depths of the Michigan forests,
Found she the hunter's lodge deserted and fallen to ruin!

  Thus did the long sad years glide on, and in seasons and places
Divers and distant far was seen the wandering maiden;--
Now in the Tents of Grace of the meek Moravian Missions,
Now in the noisy camps and the battle-fields of the army,
Now in secluded hamlets, in towns and populous cities.
Like a phantom she came, and passed away unremembered.
Fair was she and young, when in hope began the long journey;
Faded was she and old, when in disappointment it ended.
Each succeeding year stole something away from her beauty,
Leaving behind it, broader and deeper, the gloom and the shadow.
Then there appeared and spread faint streaks of gray o'er her forehead,
Dawn of another life, that broke o'er her earthy horizon,
As in the eastern sky the first faint streaks of the morning.



V

In that delightful land which is washed by the Delaware's waters,
Guarding in sylvan shades the name of Penn the apostle,
Stands on the banks of its beautiful stream the city he founded.
There all the air is balm, and the peach is the emblem of beauty,
And the streets still re-echo the names of the trees of the forest,
As if they fain would appease the Dryads whose haunts they molested.
There from the troubled sea had Evangeline landed, an exile,
Finding among the children of Penn a home and a country.
There old Rene Leblanc had died; and when he departed,
Saw at his side only one of all his hundred descendants.
Something at least there was in the friendly streets of the city,
Something that spake to her heart, and made her no longer a stranger;
And her ear was pleased with the Thee and Thou of the Quakers,
For it recalled the past, the old Acadian country,
Where all men were equal, and all were brothers and sisters.
So, when the fruitless search, the disappointed endeavor,
Ended, to recommence no more upon earth, uncomplaining,
Thither, as leaves to the light, were turned her thoughts and her footsteps.
As from a mountain's top the rainy mists of the morning
Roll away, and afar we behold the landscape below us,
Sun-illumined, with shining rivers and cities and hamlets,
So fell the mists from her mind, and she saw the world far below her,
Dark no longer, but all illumined with love; and the pathway
Which she had climbed so far, lying smooth and fair in the distance.
Gabriel was not forgotten.  Within her heart was his image,
Clothed in the beauty of love and youth, as last she beheld him,
Only more beautiful made by his deathlike silence and absence.
Into her thoughts of him time entered not, for it was not.
Over him years had no power; he was not changed, but transfigured;
He had become to her heart as one who is dead, and not absent;
Patience and abnegation of self, and devotion to others,
This was the lesson a life of trial and sorrow had taught her.
So was her love diffused, but, like to some odorous spices,
Suffered no waste nor loss, though filling the air with aroma.
Other hope had she none, nor wish in life, but to follow
Meekly, with reverent steps, the sacred feet of her Saviour.
Thus many years she lived as a Sister of Mercy; frequenting
Lonely and wretched roofs in the crowded lanes of the city,
Where distress and want concealed themselves from the sunlight,
Where disease and sorrow in garrets languished neglected.
Night after night, when the world was asleep, as the watchman repeated
Loud, through the gusty streets, that all was well in the city,
High at some lonely window he saw the light of her taper.
Day after day, in the gray of the dawn, as slow through the suburbs
Plodded the German farmer, with flowers and fruits for the market,
Met he that meek, pale face, returning home from its watchings.

  Then it came to pass that a pestilence fell on the city,
Presaged by wondrous signs, and mostly by flocks of wild pigeons,
Darkening the sun in their flight, with naught in their craws but an acorn.
And, as the tides of the sea arise in the month of September,
Flooding some silver stream, till it spreads to a lake in the meadow,
So death flooded life, and, o'erflowing its natural margin,
Spread to a brackish lake, the silver stream of existence.
Wealth had no power to bribe, nor beauty to charm, the oppressor;
But all perished alike beneath the scourge of his anger;--
Only, alas! the poor, who had neither friends nor attendants,
Crept away to die in the almshouse, home of the homeless.
Then in the suburbs it stood, in the midst of meadows and woodlands;
Now the city surrounds it; but still, with its gateway and wicket
Meek, in the midst of splendor, its humble walls seem to echo
Softly the words of the Lord:--"The poor ye always have with you."
Thither, by night and by day, came the Sister of Mercy.  The dying
Looked up into her face, and thought, indeed, to behold there
Gleams of celestial light encircle her forehead with splendor,
Such as the artist paints o'er the brows of saints and apostles,
Or such as hangs by night o'er a city seen at a distance.
Unto their eyes it seemed the lamps of the city celestial,
Into whose shining gates erelong their spirits would enter.

  Thus, on a Sabbath morn, through the streets, deserted and silent,
Wending her quiet way, she entered the door of the almshouse.
Sweet on the summer air was the odor of flowers in the garden;
And she paused on her way to gather the fairest among them,
That the dying once more might rejoice in their fragrance and beauty.
Then, as she mounted the stairs to the corridors, cooled by the east-wind,
Distant and soft on her ear fell the chimes from the belfry of Christ Church,
While, intermingled with these, across the meadows were wafted
Sounds of psalms, that were sung by the Swedes in their church at Wicaco.
Soft as descending wings fell the calm of the hour on her spirit;
Something within her said, "At length thy trials are ended";
And, with light in her looks, she entered the chambers of sickness.
Noiselessly moved about the assiduous, careful attendants,
Moistening the feverish lip, and the aching brow, and in silence
Closing the sightless eyes of the dead, and concealing their faces,
Where on their pallets they lay, like drifts of snow by the roadside.
Many a languid head, upraised as Evangeline entered,
Turned on its pillow of pain to gaze while she passed, for her presence
Fell on their hearts like a ray of the sun on the walls of a prison.
And, as she looked around, she saw how Death, the consoler,
Laying his hand upon many a heart, had healed it forever.
Many familiar forms had disappeared in the night time;
Vacant their places were, or filled already by strangers.

  Suddenly, as if arrested by fear or a feeling of wonder,
Still she stood, with her colorless lips apart, while a shudder
Ran through her frame, and, forgotten, the flowerets dropped from her fingers,
And from her eyes and cheeks the light and bloom of the morning.
Then there escaped from her lips a cry of such terrible anguish,
That the dying heard it, and started up from their pillows.
On the pallet before her was stretched the form of an old man.
Long, and thin, and gray were the locks that shaded his temples;
But, as he lay in the in morning light, his face for a moment
Seemed to assume once more the forms of its earlier manhood;
So are wont to be changed the faces of those who are dying.
Hot and red on his lips still burned the flush of the fever,
As if life, like the Hebrew, with blood had besprinkled its portals,
That the Angel of Death might see the sign, and pass over.
Motionless, senseless, dying, he lay, and his spirit exhausted
Seemed to be sinking down through infinite depths in the darkness,
Darkness of slumber and death, forever sinking and sinking.
Then through those realms of shade, in multiplied reverberations,
Heard he that cry of pain, and through the hush that succeeded
Whispered a gentle voice, in accents tender and saint-like,
"Gabriel!  O my beloved!" and died away into silence.
Then he beheld, in a dream, once more the home of his childhood;
Green Acadian meadows, with sylvan rivers among them,
Village, and mountain, and woodlands; and, walking under their shadow,
As in the days of her youth, Evangeline rose in his vision.
Tears came into his eyes; and as slowly he lifted his eyelids,
Vanished the vision away, but Evangeline knelt by his bedside.
Vainly he strove to whisper her name, for the accents unuttered
Died on his lips, and their motion revealed what his tongue would have spoken.
Vainly he strove to rise; and Evangeline, kneeling beside him,
Kissed his dying lips, and laid his head on her bosom.
Sweet was the light of his eyes; but it suddenly sank into darkness,
As when a lamp is blown out by a gust of wind at a casement.

  All was ended now, the hope, and the fear, and the sorrow,
All the aching of heart, the restless, unsatisfied longing,
All the dull, deep pain, and constant anguish of patience!
And, as she pressed once more the lifeless head to her bosom,
Meekly she bowed her own, and murmured, "Father, I thank thee!"

       -------------

Still stands the forest primeval; but far away from its shadow,
Side by side, in their nameless graves, the lovers are sleeping.
Under the humble walls of the little Catholic churchyard,
In the heart of the city, they lie, unknown and unnoticed.
Daily the tides of life go ebbing and flowing beside them,
Thousands of throbbing hearts, where theirs are at rest and forever,
Thousands of aching brains, where theirs no longer are busy,
Thousands of toiling hands, where theirs have ceased from their labors,
Thousands of weary feet, where theirs have completed their journey!

  Still stands the forest primeval; but under the shade of its branches
Dwells another race, with other customs and language.
Only along the shore of the mournful and misty Atlantic
Linger a few Acadian peasants, whose fathers from exile
Wandered back to their native land to die in its bosom.
In the fisherman's cot the wheel and the loom are still busy;
Maidens still wear their Norman caps and their kirtles of homespun,
And by the evening fire repeat Evangeline's story,
While from its rocky caverns the deep-voiced, neighboring ocean
Speaks, and in accents disconsolate answers the wail of the forest.


**************

THE SEASIDE AND THE FIRESIDE

DEDICATION

As one who, walking in the twilight gloom,
  Hears round about him voices as it darkens,
And seeing not the forms from which they come,
  Pauses from time to time, and turns and hearkens;

So walking here in twilight, O my friends!
  I hear your voices, softened by the distance,
And pause, and turn to listen, as each sends
  His words of friendship, comfort, and assistance.

If any thought of mine, or sung or told,
  Has ever given delight or consolation,
Ye have repaid me back a thousand-fold,
  By every friendly sign and salutation.

Thanks for the sympathies that ye have shown!
  Thanks for each kindly word, each silent token,
That teaches me, when seeming most alone,
  Friends are around us, though no word be spoken.

Kind messages, that pass from land to land;
  Kind letters, that betray the heart's deep history,
In which we feel the pressure of a hand,--
  One touch of fire,--and all the rest is mystery!

The pleasant books, that silently among
  Our household treasures take familiar places,
And are to us as if a living tongue
  Spice from the printed leaves or pictured faces!

Perhaps on earth I never shall behold,
  With eye of sense, your outward form and semblance;
Therefore to me ye never will grow old,
  But live forever young in my remembrance.

Never grow old, nor change, nor pass away!
   Your gentle voices will flow on forever,
 When life grows bare and tarnished with decay,
  As through a leafless landscape flows a river.

Not chance of birth or place has made us friends,
  Being oftentimes of different tongues and nations,
But the endeavor for the selfsame ends,
  With the same hopes, and fears, and aspirations.

Therefore I hope to join your seaside walk,
  Saddened, and mostly silent, with emotion;
Not interrupting with intrusive talk
  The grand, majestic symphonies of ocean.

Therefore I hope, as no unwelcome guest,
  At your warm fireside, when the lamps are lighted,
To have my place reserved among the rest,
  Nor stand as one unsought and uninvited!



BY THE SEASIDE

THE BUILDING OF THE SHIP

"Build me straight, O worthy Master!
  Stanch and strong, a goodly vessel,
That shall laugh at all disaster,
  And with wave and whirlwind wrestle!"

The merchant's word
Delighted the Master heard;
For his heart was in his work, and the heart
Giveth grace unto every Art.

A quiet smile played round his lips,
As the eddies and dimples of the tide
Play round the bows of ships,
That steadily at anchor ride.
And with a voice that was full of glee,
He answered, "Erelong we will launch
A vessel as goodly, and strong, and stanch,
As ever weathered a wintry sea!"
And first with nicest skill and art,
Perfect and finished in every part,
A little model the Master wrought,
Which should be to the larger plan
What the child is to the man,
Its counterpart in miniature;
That with a hand more swift and sure
The greater labor might be brought
To answer to his inward thought.
And as he labored, his mind ran o'er
The various ships that were built of yore,
And above them all, and strangest of all
Towered the Great Harry, crank and tall,
Whose picture was hanging on the wall,
With bows and stern raised high in air,
And balconies hanging here and there,
And signal lanterns and flags afloat,
And eight round towers, like those that frown
From some old castle, looking down
Upon the drawbridge and the moat.
And he said with a smile, "Our ship, I wis,
Shall be of another form than this!"
It was of another form, indeed;
Built for freight, and yet for speed,
A beautiful and gallant craft;
Broad in the beam, that the stress of the blast,
Pressing down upon sail and mast,
Might not the sharp bows overwhelm;
Broad in the beam, but sloping aft
With graceful curve and slow degrees,
That she might be docile to the helm,
And that the currents of parted seas,
Closing behind, with mighty force,
Might aid and not impede her course.

In the ship-yard stood the Master,
  With the model of the vessel,
That should laugh at all disaster,
  And with wave and whirlwind wrestle!

Covering many a rood of ground,
Lay the timber piled around;
Timber of chestnut, and elm, and oak,
And scattered here and there, with these,
The knarred and crooked cedar knees;
Brought from regions far away,
From Pascagoula's sunny bay,
And the banks of the roaring Roanoke!
Ah! what a wondrous thing it is
To note how many wheels of toil
One thought, one word, can set in motion!
There's not a ship that sails the ocean,
But every climate, every soil,
Must bring its tribute, great or small,
And help to build the wooden wall!

The sun was rising o'er the sea,
And long the level shadows lay,
As if they, too, the beams would be
Of some great, airy argosy.
Framed and launched in a single day.
That silent architect, the sun,
Had hewn and laid them every one,
Ere the work of man was yet begun.
Beside the Master, when he spoke,
A youth, against an anchor leaning,
Listened, to catch his slightest meaning.
Only the long waves, as they broke
In ripples on the pebbly beach,
Interrupted the old man's speech.

Beautiful they were, in sooth,
The old man and the fiery youth!
The old man, in whose busy brain
Many a ship that sailed the main
Was modelled o'er and o'er again;--
The fiery youth, who was to be
the heir of his dexterity,
The heir of his house, and his daughter's hand,
When he had built and launched from land
What the elder head had planned.

"Thus," said he, "will we build this ship!
Lay square the blocks upon the slip,
And follow well this plan of mine.
Choose the timbers with greatest care;
Of all that is unsound beware;
For only what is sound and strong
to this vessel stall belong.
Cedar of Maine and Georgia pine
Here together shall combine.
A goodly frame, and a goodly fame,
And the UNION be her name!
For the day that gives her to the sea
Shall give my daughter unto thee!"

The Master's word
Enraptured the young man heard;
And as he turned his face aside,
With a look of joy and a thrill of pride,
Standing before
Her father's door,
He saw the form of his promised bride.
The sun shone on her golden hair,
And her cheek was glowing fresh and fair,
With the breath of morn and the soft sea air.
Like a beauteous barge was she,
Still at rest on the sandy beach,
Just beyond the billow's reach;
But he
Was the restless, seething, stormy sea!
Ah, how skilful grows the hand
That obeyeth Love's command!
It is the heart, and not the brain,
That to the highest doth attain,
And he who followeth Love's behest
Far excelleth all the rest!

Thus with the rising of the sun
Was the noble task begun
And soon throughout the ship-yard's bounds
Were heard the intermingled sounds
Of axes and of mallets, plied
With vigorous arms on every side;
Plied so deftly and so well,
That, ere the shadows of evening fell,
The keel of oak for a noble ship,
Scarfed and bolted, straight and strong
Was lying ready, and stretched along
The blocks, well placed upon the slip.
Happy, thrice happy, every one
Who sees his labor well begun,
And not perplexed and multiplied,
By idly waiting for time and tide!

And when the hot, long day was o'er,
The young man at the Master's door
Sat with the maiden calm and still.
And within the porch, a little more
Removed beyond the evening chill,
The father sat, and told them tales
Of wrecks in the great September gales,
Of pirates coasting the Spanish Main,
And ships that never came back again,
The chance and change of a sailor's life,
Want and plenty, rest and strife,
His roving fancy, like the wind,
That nothing can stay and nothing can bind,
And the magic charm of foreign lands,
With shadows of palms, and shining sands,
Where the tumbling surf,
O'er the coral reefs of Madagascar,
Washes the feet of the swarthy Lascar,
As he lies alone and asleep on the turf.
And the trembling maiden held her breath
At the tales of that awful, pitiless sea,
With all its terror and mystery,
The dim, dark sea, so like unto Death,
That divides and yet unites mankind!
And whenever the old man paused, a gleam
From the bowl of his pipe would awhile illume
The silent group in the twilight gloom,
And thoughtful faces, as in a dream;
And for a moment one might mark
What had been hidden by the dark,
That the head of the maiden lay at rest,
Tenderly, on the young man's breast!

Day by day the vessel grew,
With timbers fashioned strong and true,
Stemson and keelson and sternson-knee,
Till, framed with perfect symmetry,
A skeleton ship rose up to view!
And around the bows and along the side
The heavy hammers and mallets plied,
Till after many a week, at length,
Wonderful for form and strength,
Sublime in its enormous bulk,
Loomed aloft the shadowy hulk!
And around it columns of smoke, up-wreathing.
Rose from the boiling, bubbling, seething
Caldron, that glowed,
And overflowed
With the black tar, heated for the sheathing.
And amid the clamors
Of clattering hammers,
He who listened heard now and then
The song of the Master and his men:--

"Build me straight, O worthy Master.
  Stanch and strong, a goodly vessel,
That shall laugh at all disaster,
  And with wave and whirlwind wrestle!"

With oaken brace and copper band,
Lay the rudder on the sand,
That, like a thought, should have control
Over the movement of the whole;
And near it the anchor, whose giant hand
Would reach down and grapple with the land,
And immovable and fast
Hold the great ship against the bellowing blast!
And at the bows an image stood,
By a cunning artist carved in wood,
With robes of white, that far behind
Seemed to be fluttering in the wind.
It was not shaped in a classic mould,
Not like a Nymph or Goddess of old,
Or Naiad rising from the water,
But modelled from the Master's daughter!
On many a dreary and misty night,
'T will be seen by the rays of the signal light,
Speeding along through the rain and the dark,
Like a ghost in its snow-white sark,
The pilot of some phantom bark,
Guiding the vessel, in its flight,
By a path none other knows aright!
Behold, at last,
Each tall and tapering mast
Is swung into its place;
Shrouds and stays
Holding it firm and fast!

Long ago,
In the deer-haunted forests of Maine,
When upon mountain and plain
Lay the snow,
They fell,--those lordly pines!
Those grand, majestic pines!
'Mid shouts and cheers
The jaded steers,
Panting beneath the goad,
Dragged down the weary, winding road
Those captive kings so straight and tall,
To be shorn of their streaming hair,
And, naked and bare,
To feel the stress and the strain
Of the wind and the reeling main,
Whose roar
Would remind them forevermore
Of their native forests they should not see again.

And everywhere
The slender, graceful spars
Poise aloft in the air,
And at the mast-head,
White, blue, and red,
A flag unrolls the stripes and stars.
Ah! when the wanderer, lonely, friendless,
In foreign harbors shall behold
That flag unrolled,
'T will be as a friendly hand
Stretched out from his native land,
Filling his heart with memories sweet and endless!

All is finished! and at length
Has come the bridal day
Of beauty and of strength.
To-day the vessel shall be launched!
With fleecy clouds the sky is blanched,
And o'er the bay,
Slowly, in all his splendors dight,
The great sun rises to behold the sight.

The ocean old,
Centuries old,
Strong as youth, and as uncontrolled,
Paces restless to and fro,
Up and down the sands of gold.
His beating heart is not at rest;
And far and wide,
With ceaseless flow,
His beard of snow
Heaves with the heaving of his breast.
He waits impatient for his bride.
There she stands,
With her foot upon the sands,
Decked with flags and streamers gay,
In honor of her marriage day,
Her snow-white signals fluttering, blending,
Round her like a veil descending,
Ready to be
The bride of the gray old sea.

On the deck another bride
Is standing by her lover's side.
Shadows from the flags and shrouds,
Like the shadows cast by clouds,
Broken by many a sunny fleck,
Fall around them on the deck.

The prayer is said,
The service read,
The joyous bridegroom bows his head;
And in tear's the good old Master
Shakes the brown hand of his son,
Kisses his daughter's glowing cheek
In silence, for he cannot speak,
And ever faster
Down his own the tears begin to run.
The worthy pastor--
The shepherd of that wandering flock,
That has the ocean for its wold,
That has the vessel for its fold,
Leaping ever from rock to rock--
Spake, with accents mild and clear,
Words of warning, words of cheer,
But tedious to the bridegroom's ear.
He knew the chart
Of the sailor's heart,
All its pleasures and its griefs,
All its shallows and rocky reefs,
All those secret currents, that flow
With such resistless undertow,
And lift and drift, with terrible force,
The will from its moorings and its course.
Therefore he spake, and thus said he:--
"Like unto ships far off at sea,
Outward or homeward bound, are we.
Before, behind, and all around,
Floats and swings the horizon's bound,
Seems at its distant rim to rise
And climb the crystal wall of the skies,
And then again to turn and sink,
As if we could slide from its outer brink.
Ah! it is not the sea,
It is not the sea that sinks and shelves,
But ourselves
That rock and rise
With endless and uneasy motion,
Now touching the very skies,
Now sinking into the depths of ocean.
Ah! if our souls but poise and swing
Like the compass in its brazen ring,
Ever level and ever true
To the toil and the task we have to do,
We shall sail securely, and safely reach
The Fortunate Isles, on whose shining beach
The sights we see, and the sounds we hear,
Will be those of joy and not of fear!"

Then the Master,
With a gesture of command,
Waved his hand;
And at the word,
Loud and sudden there was heard,
All around them and below,
The sound of hammers, blow on blow,
Knocking away the shores and spurs.
And see! she stirs!
She starts,--she moves,--she seems to feel
The thrill of life along her keel,
And, spurning with her foot the ground,
With one exulting, joyous bound,
She leaps into the ocean's arms!

And lo! from the assembled crowd
There rose a shout, prolonged and loud,
That to the ocean seemed to say,
"Take her, O bridegroom, old and gray,
Take her to thy protecting arms,
With all her youth and all her charms!"

How beautiful she is!  How fair
She lies within those arms, that press
Her form with many a soft caress
Of tenderness and watchful care!
Sail forth into the sea, O ship!
Through wind and wave, right onward steer!
The moistened eye, the trembling lip,
Are not the signs of doubt or fear.

Sail forth into the sea of life,
O gentle, loving, trusting wife,
And safe from all adversity
Upon the bosom of that sea
Thy comings and thy goings be!
For gentleness and love and trust
Prevail o'er angry wave and gust;
And in the wreck of noble lives
Something immortal still survives!

Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State!
Sail on, O UNION, strong and great!
Humanity with all its fears,
With all the hopes of future years,
Is hanging breathless on thy fate!
We know what Master laid thy keel,
What Workmen wrought thy ribs of steel,
Who made each mast, and sail, and rope,
What anvils rang, what hammers beat,
In what a forge and what a heat
Were shaped the anchors of thy hope!
Fear not each sudden sound and shock,
'T is of the wave and not the rock;
'T is but the flapping of the sail,
And not a rent made by the gale!
In spite of rock and tempest's roar,
In spite of false lights on the shore,
Sail on, nor fear to breast the sea
Our hearts, our hopes, are all with thee,
Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears,
Our faith triumphant o'er our fears,
Are all with thee,--are all with thee!



SEAWEED

When descends on the Atlantic
   The gigantic
Storm-wind of the equinox,
Landward in his wrath he scourges
   The toiling surges,
Laden with seaweed from the rocks:

From Bermuda's reefs; from edges
   Of sunken ledges,
In some far-off, bright Azore;
From Bahama, and the dashing,
   Silver-flashing
Surges of San Salvador;

From the tumbling surf, that buries
   The Orkneyan skerries,
Answering the hoarse Hebrides;
And from wrecks of ships, and drifting
   Spars, uplifting
On the desolate, rainy seas;--

Ever drifting, drifting, drifting
   On the shifting
Currents of the restless main;
Till in sheltered coves, and reaches
   Of sandy beaches,
All have found repose again.

So when storms of wild emotion
   Strike the ocean
Of the poet's soul, erelong
From each cave and rocky fastness,
   In its vastness,
Floats some fragment of a song:

Front the far-off isles enchanted,
   Heaven has planted
With the golden fruit of Truth;
From the flashing surf, whose vision
   Gleams Elysian
In the tropic clime of Youth;

From the strong Will, and the Endeavor
   That forever
Wrestle with the tides of Fate
From the wreck of Hopes far-scattered,
   Tempest-shattered,
Floating waste and desolate;--

Ever drifting, drifting, drifting
   On the shifting
Currents of the restless heart;
Till at length in books recorded,
   They, like hoarded
Household words, no more depart.



CHRYSAOR

Just above yon sandy bar,
  As the day grows fainter and dimmer,
Lonely and lovely, a single star
  Lights the air with a dusky glimmer

Into the ocean faint and far
  Falls the trail of its golden splendor,
And the gleam of that single star
  Is ever refulgent, soft, and tender.

Chrysaor, rising out of the sea,
  Showed thus glorious and thus emulous,
Leaving the arms of Callirrhoe,
  Forever tender, soft, and tremulous.

Thus o'er the ocean faint and far
  Trailed the gleam of his falchion brightly;
Is it a God, or is it a star
  That, entranced, I gaze on nightly!



THE SECRET OF THE SEA

Ah! what pleasant visions haunt me
  As I gaze upon the sea!
All the old romantic legends,
  All my dreams, come back to me.

Sails of silk and ropes of sandal,
  Such as gleam in ancient lore;
And the singing of the sailors,
  And the answer from the shore!

Most of all, the Spanish ballad
  Haunts me oft, and tarries long,
Of the noble Count Arnaldos
  And the sailor's mystic song.

Like the long waves on a sea-beach,
  Where the sand as silver shines,
With a soft, monotonous cadence,
  Flow its unrhymed lyric lines:--

Telling how the Count Arnaldos,
  With his hawk upon his hand,
Saw a fair and stately galley,
  Steering onward to the land;--

How he heard the ancient helmsman
  Chant a song so wild and clear,
That the sailing sea-bird slowly
  Poised upon the mast to hear,

Till his soul was full of longing,
  And he cried, with impulse strong,--
"Helmsman! for the love of heaven,
  Teach me, too, that wondrous song!"

"Wouldst thou,"--so the helmsman answered,
  "Learn the secret of the sea?
Only those who brave its dangers
  Comprehend its mystery!"

In each sail that skims the horizon,
  In each landward-blowing breeze,
I behold that stately galley,
  Hear those mournful melodies;

Till my soul is full of longing
  For the secret of the sea,
And the heart of the great ocean
  Sends a thrilling pulse through me.



TWILIGHT

The twilight is sad and cloudy,
  The wind blows wild and free,
And like the wings of sea-birds
  Flash the white caps of the sea.

But in the fisherman's cottage
  There shines a ruddier light,
And a little face at the window
  Peers out into the night.

Close, close it is pressed to the window,
  As if those childish eyes
Were looking into the darkness,
  To see some form arise.

And a woman's waving shadow
  Is passing to and fro,
Now rising to the ceiling,
  Now bowing and bending low.

What tale do the roaring ocean,
  And the night-wind, bleak and wild,
As they beat at the crazy casement,
  Tell to that little child?

And why do the roaring ocean,
  And the night-wind, wild and bleak,
As they beat at the heart of the mother,
  Drive the color from her cheek?



SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT

Southward with fleet of ice
  Sailed the corsair Death;
Wild and fast blew the blast,
  And the east-wind was his breath.

His lordly ships of ice
  Glisten in the sun;
On each side, like pennons wide,
  Flashing crystal streamlets run.

His sails of white sea-mist
  Dripped with silver rain;
But where he passed there were cast
  Leaden shadows o'er the main.

Eastward from Campobello
  Sir Humphrey Gilbert sailed;
Three days or more seaward he bore,
  Then, alas! the land-wind failed.

Alas! the land-wind failed,
  And ice-cold grew the night;
And nevermore, on sea or shore,
  Should Sir Humphrey see the light.

He sat upon the deck,
  The Book was in his hand
"Do not fear!  Heaven is as near,"
  He said, "by water as by land!"

In the first watch of the night,
  Without a signal's sound,
Out of the sea, mysteriously,
  The fleet of Death rose all around.

The moon and the evening star
  Were hanging in the shrouds;
Every mast, as it passed,
  Seemed to rake the passing clouds.

They grappled with their prize,
  At midnight black and cold!
As of a rock was the shock;
  Heavily the ground-swell rolled.

Southward through day and dark,
  They drift in close embrace,
With mist and rain, o'er the open main;
  Yet there seems no change of place.

Southward, forever southward,
  They drift through dark and day;
And like a dream, in the Gulf-Stream
  Sinking, vanish all away.



THE LIGHTHOUSE

The rocky ledge runs far into the sea,
  And on its outer point, some miles away,
The Lighthouse lifts its massive masonry,
  A pillar of fire by night, of cloud by day.

Even at this distance I can see the tides,
  Upheaving, break unheard along its base,
A speechless wrath, that rises and subsides
  In the white lip and tremor of the face.

And as the evening darkens, lo! how bright,
  Through the deep purple of the twilight air,
Beams forth the sudden radiance of its light
  With strange, unearthly splendor in the glare!

Not one alone; from each projecting cape
  And perilous reef along the ocean's verge,
Starts into life a dim, gigantic shape,
  Holding its lantern o'er the restless surge.

Like the great giant Christopher it stands
  Upon the brink of the tempestuous wave,
Wading far out among the rocks and sands,
  The night-o'ertaken mariner to save.

And the great ships sail outward and return,
  Bending and bowing o'er the billowy swells,
And ever joyful, as they see it burn,
  They wave their silent welcomes and farewells.

They come forth from the darkness, and their sails
  Gleam for a moment only in the blaze,
And eager faces, as the light unveils,
  Gaze at the tower, and vanish while they gaze.

The mariner remembers when a child,
  On his first voyage, he saw it fade and sink;
And when, returning from adventures wild,
  He saw it rise again o'er ocean's brink.

Steadfast, serene, immovable, the same
  Year after year, through all the silent night
Burns on forevermore that quenchless flame,
  Shines on that inextinguishable light!

It sees the ocean to its bosom clasp
  The rocks and sea-sand with the kiss of peace;
It sees the wild winds lift it in their grasp,
  And hold it up, and shake it like a fleece.

The startled waves leap over it; the storm
  Smites it with all the scourges of the rain,
And steadily against its solid form
  Press the great shoulders of the hurricane.

The sea-bird wheeling round it, with the din
  Of wings and winds and solitary cries,
Blinded and maddened by the light within,
  Dashes himself against the glare, and dies.

A new Prometheus, chained upon the rock,
  Still grasping in his hand the fire of Jove,
It does not hear the cry, nor heed the shock,
  But hails the mariner with words of love.

"Sail on!" it says, "sail on, ye stately ships!
  And with your floating bridge the ocean span;
Be mine to guard this light from all eclipse,
  Be yours to bring man nearer unto man!"



THE FIRE OF DRIFT-WOOD

DEVEREUX FARM, NEAR MARBLEHEAD

We sat within the farm-house old,
  Whose windows, looking o'er the bay,
Gave to the sea-breeze, damp and cold,
  An easy entrance, night and day.

Not far away we saw the port,
  The strange, old-fashioned, silent town,
The lighthouse, the dismantled fort,
  The wooden houses, quaint and brown.

We sat and talked until the night,
  Descending, filled the little room;
Our faces faded from the sight,
  Our voices only broke the gloom.

We spake of many a vanished scene,
  Of what we once had thought and said,
Of what had been, and might have been,
  And who was changed, and who was dead;

And all that fills the hearts of friends,
  When first they feel, with secret pain,
Their lives thenceforth have separate ends,
  And never can be one again;

The first slight swerving of the heart,
  That words are powerless to express,
And leave it still unsaid in part,
  Or say it in too great excess.

The very tones in which we spake
  Had something strange, I could but mark;
The leaves of memory seemed to make
  A mournful rustling in the dark.

Oft died the words upon our lips,
  As suddenly, from out the fire
Built of the wreck of stranded ships,
  The flames would leap and then expire.

And, as their splendor flashed and failed,
  We thought of wrecks upon the main,
Of ships dismasted, that were hailed
  And sent no answer back again.

The windows, rattling in their frames,
  The ocean, roaring up the beach,
The gusty blast, the bickering flames,
  All mingled vaguely in our speech.

Until they made themselves a part
  Of fancies floating through the brain,
The long-lost ventures of the heart,
  That send no answers back again.

O flames that glowed!  O hearts that yearned!
  They were indeed too much akin,
The drift-wood fire without that burned,
  The thoughts that burned and glowed within.



BY THE FIRESIDE

RESIGNATION

There is no flock, however watched and tended,
  But one dead lamb is there!
There is no fireside, howsoe'er defended,
  But has one vacant chair!

The air is full of farewells to the dying,
  And mournings for the dead;
The heart of Rachel, for her children crying,
  Will not be comforted!

Let us be patient!  These severe afflictions
  Not from the ground arise,
But oftentimes celestial benedictions
  Assume this dark disguise.

We see but dimly through the mists and vapors;
  Amid these earthly damps
What seem to us but sad, funereal tapers
  May be heaven's distant lamps.

There is no Death!  What seems so is transition;
  This life of mortal breath
Is but a suburb of the life elysian,
  Whose portal we call Death.

She is not dead,--the child of our affection,--
  But gone unto that school
Where she no longer needs our poor protection,
  And Christ himself doth rule.

In that great cloister's stillness and seclusion,
  By guardian angels led,
Safe from temptation, safe from sin's pollution,
  She lives, whom we call dead.

Day after day we think what she is doing
  In those bright realms of air;
Year after year, her tender steps pursuing,
  Behold her grown more fair.

Thus do we walk with her, and keep unbroken
  The bond which nature gives,
Thinking that our remembrance, though unspoken,
  May reach her where she lives.

Not as a child shall we again behold her;
  For when with raptures wild
In our embraces we again enfold her,
  She will not be a child;

But a fair maiden, in her Father's mansion,
  Clothed with celestial grace;
And beautiful with all the soul's expansion
  Shall we behold her face.

And though at times impetuous with emotion
  And anguish long suppressed,
The swelling heart heaves moaning like the ocean,
  That cannot be at rest,--

We will be patient, and assuage the feeling
  We may not wholly stay;
By silence sanctifying, not concealing,
  The grief that must have way.



THE BUILDERS

All are architects of Fate,
  Working in these walls of Time;
Some with massive deeds and great,
  Some with ornaments of rhyme.

Nothing useless is, or low;
  Each thing in its place is best;
And what seems but idle show
  Strengthens and supports the rest.

For the structure that we raise,
  Time is with materials filled;
Our to-days and yesterdays
  Are the blocks with which we build.

Truly shape and fashion these;
  Leave no yawning gaps between;
Think not, because no man sees,
  Such things will remain unseen.

In the elder days of Art,
  Builders wrought with greatest care
Each minute and unseen part;
  For the Gods see everywhere.

Let us do our work as well,
  Both the unseen and the seen;
Make the house, where Gods may dwell,
  Beautiful, entire, and clean.

Else our lives are incomplete,
  Standing in these walls of Time,
Broken stairways, where the feet
  Stumble as they seek to climb.

Build to-day, then, strong and sure,
  With a firm and ample base;
And ascending and secure
  Shall to-morrow find its place.

Thus alone can we attain
  To those turrets, where the eye
Sees the world as one vast plain,
  And one boundless reach of sky.



SAND OF THE DESERT IN AN HOUR-GLASS

A handful of red sand, from the hot clime
  Of Arab deserts brought,
Within this glass becomes the spy of Time,
  The minister of Thought.

How many weary centuries has it been
  About those deserts blown!
How many strange vicissitudes has seen,
  How many histories known!

Perhaps the camels of the Ishmaelite
  Trampled and passed it o'er,
When into Egypt from the patriarch's sight
  His favorite son they bore.

Perhaps the feet of Moses, burnt and bare,
  Crushed it beneath their tread;
Or Pharaoh's flashing wheels into the air
  Scattered it as they sped;

Or Mary, with the Christ of Nazareth
  Held close in her caress,
Whose pilgrimage of hope and love and faith
  Illumed the wilderness;

Or anchorites beneath Engaddi's palms
  Pacing the Dead Sea beach,
And singing slow their old Armenian psalms
  In half-articulate speech;

Or caravans, that from Bassora's gate
  With westward steps depart;
Or Mecca's pilgrims, confident of Fate,
  And resolute in heart!

These have passed over it, or may have passed!
  Now in this crystal tower
Imprisoned by some curious hand at last,
  It counts the passing hour,

And as I gaze, these narrow walls expand;
  Before my dreamy eye
Stretches the desert with its shifting sand,
  Its unimpeded sky.

And borne aloft by the sustaining blast,
  This little golden thread
Dilates into a column high and vast,
  A form of fear and dread.

And onward, and across the setting sun,
  Across the boundless plain,
The column and its broader shadow run,
  Till thought pursues in vain.

The vision vanishes!  These walls again
  Shut out the lurid sun,
Shut out the hot, immeasurable plain;
  The half-hour's sand is run!



THE OPEN WINDOW

The old house by the lindens
  Stood silent in the shade,
And on the gravelled pathway
  The light and shadow played.

I saw the nursery windows
  Wide open to the air;
But the faces of the children,
  They were no longer there.

The large Newfoundland house-dog
  Was standing by the door;
He looked for his little playmates,
  Who would return no more.

They walked not under the lindens,
  They played not in the hall;
But shadow, and silence, and sadness
  Were hanging over all.

The birds sang in the branches,
  With sweet, familiar tone;
But the voices of the children
  Will be heard in dreams alone!

And the boy that walked beside me,
  He could not understand
Why closer in mine, ah! closer,
  I pressed his warm, soft hand!



KING WITLAF'S DRINKING-HORN

Witlaf, a king of the Saxons,
  Ere yet his last he breathed,
To the merry monks of Croyland
  His drinking-horn bequeathed,--

That, whenever they sat at their revels,
  And drank from the golden bowl,
They might remember the donor,
  And breathe a prayer for his soul.

So sat they once at Christmas,
  And bade the goblet pass;
In their beards the red wine glistened
  Like dew-drops in the grass.

They drank to the soul of Witlaf,
  They drank to Christ the Lord,
And to each of the Twelve Apostles,
  Who had preached his holy word.

They drank to the Saints and Martyrs
  Of the dismal days of yore,
And as soon as the horn was empty
  They remembered one Saint more.

And the reader droned from the pulpit
  Like the murmur of many bees,
The legend of good Saint Guthlac,
  And Saint Basil's homilies;

Till the great bells of the convent,
  From their prison in the tower,
Guthlac and Bartholomaeus,
  Proclaimed the midnight hour.

And the Yule-log cracked in the chimney,
  And the Abbot bowed his head,
And the flamelets flapped and flickered,
  But the Abbot was stark and dead.

Yet still in his pallid fingers
  He clutched the golden bowl,
In which, like a pearl dissolving,
  Had sunk and dissolved his soul.

But not for this their revels
  The jovial monks forbore,
For they cried, "Fill high the goblet!
  We must drink to one Saint more!"



GASPAR BECERRA

By his evening fire the artist
  Pondered o'er his secret shame;
Baffled, weary, and disheartened,
  Still he mused, and dreamed of fame.

'T was an image of the Virgin
  That had tasked his utmost skill;
But, alas! his fair ideal
  Vanished and escaped him still.

From a distant Eastern island
  Had the precious wood been brought
Day and night the anxious master
  At his toil untiring wrought;

Till, discouraged and desponding,
  Sat he now in shadows deep,
And the day's humiliation
  Found oblivion in sleep.

Then a voice cried, "Rise, O master!
  From the burning brand of oak
Shape the thought that stirs within thee!"
  And the startled artist woke,--

Woke, and from the smoking embers
  Seized and quenched the glowing wood;
And therefrom he carved an image,
  And he saw that it was good.

O thou sculptor, painter, poet!
  Take this lesson to thy heart:
That is best which lieth nearest;
  Shape from that thy work of art.


PEGASUS IN POUND

Once into a quiet village,
  Without haste and without heed,
In the golden prime of morning,
  Strayed the poet's winged steed.

It was Autumn, and incessant
  Piped the quails from shocks and sheaves,
And, like living coals, the apples
  Burned among the withering leaves.

Loud the clamorous bell was ringing
  From its belfry gaunt and grim;
'T was the daily call to labor,
  Not a triumph meant for him.

Not the less he saw the landscape,
  In its gleaming vapor veiled;
Not the less he breathed the odors
  That the dying leaves exhaled.

Thus, upon the village common,
  By the school-boys he was found;
And the wise men, in their wisdom,
  Put him straightway into pound.

Then the sombre village crier,
  Ringing loud his brazen bell,
Wandered down the street proclaiming
  There was an estray to sell.

And the curious country people,
  Rich and poor, and young and old,
Came in haste to see this wondrous
  Winged steed, with mane of gold.

Thus the day passed, and the evening
  Fell, with vapors cold and dim;
But it brought no food nor shelter,
  Brought no straw nor stall, for him.

Patiently, and still expectant,
  Looked he through the wooden bars,
Saw the moon rise o'er the landscape,
  Saw the tranquil, patient stars;

Till at length the bell at midnight
  Sounded from its dark abode,
And, from out a neighboring farm-yard
  Loud the cock Alectryon crowed.

Then, with nostrils wide distended,
  Breaking from his iron chain,
And unfolding far his pinions,
  To those stars he soared again.

On the morrow, when the village
  Woke to all its toil and care,
Lo! the strange steed had departed,
  And they knew not when nor where.

But they found, upon the greensward
  Where his straggling hoofs had trod,
Pure and bright, a fountain flowing
  From the hoof-marks in the sod.

From that hour, the fount unfailing
  Gladdens the whole region round,
Strengthening all who drink its waters,
  While it soothes them with its sound.



TEGNER'S DRAPA

I heard a voice, that cried,
"Balder the Beautiful
Is dead, is dead!"
And through the misty air
Passed like the mournful cry
Of sunward sailing cranes.

I saw the pallid corpse
Of the dead sun
Borne through the Northern sky.
Blasts from Niffelheim
Lifted the sheeted mists
Around him as he passed.

And the voice forever cried,
"Balder the Beautiful
Is dead, is dead!"
And died away
Through the dreary night,
In accents of despair.

Balder the Beautiful,
God of the summer sun,
Fairest of all the Gods!
Light from his forehead beamed,
Runes were upon his tongue,
As on the warrior's sword.

All things in earth and air
Bound were by magic spell
Never to do him harm;
Even the plants and stones;
All save the mistletoe,
The sacred mistletoe!

Hoeder, the blind old God,
Whose feet are shod with silence,
Pierced through that gentle breast
With his sharp spear, by fraud
Made of the mistletoe,
The accursed mistletoe!

They laid him in his ship,
With horse and harness,
As on a funeral pyre.
Odin placed
A ring upon his finger,
And whispered in his ear.

They launched the burning ship!
It floated far away
Over the misty sea,
Till like the sun it seemed,
Sinking beneath the waves.
Balder returned no more!

So perish the old Gods!
But out of the sea of Time
Rises a new land of song,
Fairer than the old.
Over its meadows green
Walk the young bards and sing.

Build it again,
O ye bards,
Fairer than before!
Ye fathers of the new race,
Feed upon morning dew,
Sing the new Song of Love!

The law of force is dead!
The law of love prevails!
Thor, the thunderer,
Shall rule the earth no more,
No more, with threats,
Challenge the meek Christ.

Sing no more,
O ye bards of the North,
Of Vikings and of Jarls!
Of the days of Eld
Preserve the freedom only,
Not the deeds of blood!



SONNET

ON MRS. KEMBLE'S READINGS FROM SHAKESPEARE

O precious evenings! all too swiftly sped!
  Leaving us heirs to amplest heritages
  Of all the best thoughts of the greatest sages,
  And giving tongues unto the silent dead!
How our hearts glowed and trembled as she read,
  Interpreting by tones the wondrous pages
  Of the great poet who foreruns the ages,
  Anticipating all that shall be said!
O happy Reader! having for thy text
  The magic book, whose Sibylline leaves have caught
  The rarest essence of all human thought!
O happy Poet! by no critic vext!
  How must thy listening spirit now rejoice
  To be interpreted by such a voice!



THE SINGERS

God sent his Singers upon earth
With songs of sadness and of mirth,
That they might touch the hearts of men,
And bring them back to heaven again.

The first, a youth, with soul of fire,
Held in his hand a golden lyre;
Through groves he wandered, and by streams,
Playing the music of our dreams.

The second, with a bearded face,
Stood singing in the market-place,
And stirred with accents deep and loud
The hearts of all the listening crowd.

A gray old man, the third and last,
Sang in cathedrals dim and vast,
While the majestic organ rolled
Contrition from its mouths of gold.

And those who heard the Singers three
Disputed which the best might be;
For still their music seemed to start
Discordant echoes in each heart,

But the great Master said, "I see
No best in kind, but in degree;
I gave a various gift to each,
To charm, to strengthen, and to teach.

"These are the three great chords of might,
And he whose ear is tuned aright
Will hear no discord in the three,
But the most perfect harmony."



SUSPIRIA

Take them, O Death! and bear away
  Whatever thou canst call thine own!
Thine image, stamped upon this clay,
  Doth give thee that, but that alone!

Take them, O Grave! and let them lie
  Folded upon thy narrow shelves,
As garments by the soul laid by,
  And precious only to ourselves!

Take them, O great Eternity!
  Our little life is but a gust
That bends the branches of thy tree,
  And trails its blossoms in the dust!



HYMN

FOR MY BROTHER'S ORDINATION

Christ to the young man said: "Yet one thing more;
  If thou wouldst perfect be,
Sell all thou hast and give it to the poor,
  And come and follow me!"

Within this temple Christ again, unseen,
  Those sacred words hath said,
And his invisible hands to-day have been
  Laid on a young man's head.

And evermore beside him on his way
  The unseen Christ shall move,
That he may lean upon his arm and say,
  "Dost thou, dear Lord, approve?"

Beside him at the marriage feast shall be,
  To make the scene more fair;
Beside him in the dark Gethsemane
  Of pain and midnight prayer.

O holy trust!  O endless sense of rest!
  Like the beloved John
To lay his head upon the Saviour's breast,
  And thus to journey on!


***************

THE SONG OF HIAWATHA
<Notes from HIAWATHA follow>

INTRODUCTION

Should you ask me, whence these stories?
Whence these legends and traditions,
With the odors of the forest
With the dew and damp of meadows,
With the curling smoke of wigwams,
With the rushing of great rivers,
With their frequent repetitions,
And their wild reverberations
As of thunder in the mountains?
  I should answer, I should tell you,
"From the forests and the prairies,
From the great lakes of the Northland,
From the land of the Ojibways,
From the land of the Dacotahs,
From the mountains, moors, and fen-lands
Where the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
Feeds among the reeds and rushes.
I repeat them as I heard them
From the lips of Nawadaha,
The musician, the sweet singer."
  Should you ask where Nawadaha
Found these songs so wild and wayward,
Found these legends and traditions,
I should answer, I should tell you,
"In the bird's-nests of the forest,
In the lodges of the beaver,
In the hoof-prints of the bison,
In the eyry of the eagle!
  "All the wild-fowl sang them to him,
In the moorlands and the fen-lands,
In the melancholy marshes;
Chetowaik, the plover, sang them,
Mahng, the loon, the wild-goose, Wawa,
The blue heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
And the grouse, the Mushkodasa!"
  If still further you should ask me,
Saying, "Who was Nawadaha?
Tell us of this Nawadaha,"
I should answer your inquiries
Straightway in such words as follow.
  "In the vale of Tawasentha,
In the green and silent valley,
By the pleasant water-courses,
Dwelt the singer Nawadaha.
Round about the Indian village
Spread the meadows and the corn-fields,
And beyond them stood the forest,
Stood the groves of singing pine-trees,
Green in Summer, white in Winter,
Ever sighing, ever singing.
  "And the pleasant water-courses,
You could trace them through the valley,
By the rushing in the Spring-time,
By the alders in the Summer,
By the white fog in the Autumn,
By the black line in the Winter;
And beside them dwelt the singer,
In the vale of Tawasentha,
In the green and silent valley.
  "There he sang of Hiawatha,
Sang the Song of Hiawatha,
Sang his wondrous birth and being,
How he prayed and how he fasted,
How he lived, and toiled, and suffered,
That the tribes of men might prosper,
That he might advance his people!"
  Ye who love the haunts of Nature,
Love the sunshine of the meadow,
Love the shadow of the forest,
Love the wind among the branches,
And the rain-shower and the snow-storm,
And the rushing of great rivers
Through their palisades of pine-trees,
And the thunder in the mountains,
Whose innumerable echoes
Flap like eagles in their eyries;--
Listen to these wild traditions,
To this Song of Hiawatha!
  Ye who love a nation's legends,
Love the ballads of a people,
That like voices from afar off
Call to us to pause and listen,
Speak in tones so plain and childlike,
Scarcely can the ear distinguish
Whether they are sung or spoken;--
Listen to this Indian Legend,
To this Song of Hiawatha!
  Ye whose hearts are fresh and simple,
Who have faith in God and Nature,
Who believe that in all ages
Every human heart is human,
That in even savage bosoms
There are longings, yearnings, strivings
For the good they comprehend not,
That the feeble hands and helpless,
Groping blindly in the darkness,
Touch God's right hand in that darkness
And are lifted up and strengthened;--
Listen to this simple story,
To this Song of Hiawatha!
  Ye, who sometimes, in your rambles
Through the green lanes of the country,
Where the tangled barberry-bushes
Hang their tufts of crimson berries
Over stone walls gray with mosses,
Pause by some neglected graveyard,
For a while to muse, and ponder
On a half-effaced inscription,
Written with little skill of song-craft,
Homely phrases, but each letter
Full of hope and yet of heart-break,
Full of all the tender pathos
Of the Here and the Hereafter;--
Stay and read this rude inscription,
Read this Song of Hiawatha!



I

THE PEACE-PIPE

On the Mountains of the Prairie,
On the great Red Pipe-stone Quarry,
Gitche Manito, the mighty,
He the Master of Life, descending,
On the red crags of the quarry
Stood erect, and called the nations,
Called the tribes of men together.
  From his footprints flowed a river,
Leaped into the light of morning,
O'er the precipice plunging downward
Gleamed like Ishkoodah, the comet.
And the Spirit, stooping earthward,
With his finger on the meadow
Traced a winding pathway for it,
Saying to it, "Run in this way!"
  From the red stone of the quarry
With his hand he broke a fragment,
Moulded it into a pipe-head,
Shaped and fashioned it with figures;
From the margin of the river
Took a long reed for a pipe-stem,
With its dark green leaves upon it;
Filled the pipe with bark of willow,
With the bark of the red willow;
Breathed upon the neighboring forest,
Made its great boughs chafe together,
Till in flame they burst and kindled;
And erect upon the mountains,
Gitche Manito, the mighty,
Smoked the calumet, the Peace-Pipe,
As a signal to the nations.
  And the smoke rose slowly, slowly,
Through the tranquil air of morning,
First a single line of darkness,
Then a denser, bluer vapor,
Then a snow-white cloud unfolding,
Like the tree-tops of the forest,
Ever rising, rising, rising,
Till it touched the top of heaven,
Till it broke against the heaven,
And rolled outward all around it.
  From the Vale of Tawasentha,
From the Valley of Wyoming,
From the groves of Tuscaloosa,
From the far-off Rocky Mountains,
From the Northern lakes and rivers
All the tribes beheld the signal,
Saw the distant smoke ascending,
The Pukwana of the Peace-Pipe.
  And the Prophets of the nations
Said: "Behold it, the Pukwana!
By the signal of the Peace-Pipe,
Bending like a wand of willow,
Waving like a hand that beckons,
Gitche Manito, the mighty,
Calls the tribes of men together,
Calls the warriors to his council!"
  Down the rivers, o'er the prairies,
Came the warriors of the nations,
Came the Delawares and Mohawks,
Came the Choctaws and Camanches,
Came the Shoshonies and Blackfeet,
Came the Pawnees and Omahas,
Came the Mandans and Dacotahs,
Came the Hurons and Ojibways,
All the warriors drawn together
By the signal of the Peace-Pipe,
To the Mountains of the Prairie,
To the great Red Pipe-stone Quarry.
  And they stood there on the meadow,
With their weapons and their war-gear,
Painted like the leaves of Autumn,
Painted like the sky of morning,
Wildly glaring at each other;
In their faces stern defiance,
In their hearts the feuds of ages,
The hereditary hatred,
The ancestral thirst of vengeance.
  Gitche Manito, the mighty,
The creator of the nations,
Looked upon them with compassion,
With paternal love and pity;
Looked upon their wrath and wrangling
But as quarrels among children,
But as feuds and fights of children!
  Over them he stretched his right hand,
To subdue their stubborn natures,
To allay their thirst and fever,
By the shadow of his right hand;
Spake to them with voice majestic
As the sound of far-off waters,
Falling into deep abysses,
Warning, chiding, spake in this wise:--
  "O my children! my poor children!
Listen to the words of wisdom,
Listen to the words of warning,
From the lips of the Great Spirit,
From the Master of Life, who made you!
  "I have given you lands to hunt in,
I have given you streams to fish in,
I have given you bear and bison,
I have given you roe and reindeer,
I have given you brant and beaver,
Filled the marshes full of wild-fowl,
Filled the rivers full of fishes:
Why then are you not contented?
Why then will you hunt each other?
  "I am weary of your quarrels,
Weary of your wars and bloodshed,
Weary of your prayers for vengeance,
Of your wranglings and dissensions;
All your strength is in your union,
All your danger is in discord;
Therefore be at peace henceforward,
And as brothers live together.
  "I will send a Prophet to you,
A Deliverer of the nations,
Who shall guide you and shall teach you,
Who shall toil and suffer with you.
If you listen to his counsels,
You will multiply and prosper;
If his warnings pass unheeded,
You will fade away and perish!
  "Bathe now in the stream before you,
Wash the war-paint from your faces,
Wash the blood-stains from your fingers,
Bury your war-clubs and your weapons,
Break the red stone from this quarry,
Mould and make it into Peace-Pipes,
Take the reeds that grow beside you,
Deck them with your brightest feathers,
Smoke the calumet together,
And as brothers live henceforward!"
  Then upon the ground the warriors
Threw their cloaks and shirts of deer-skin,
Threw their weapons and their war-gear,
Leaped into the rushing river,
Washed the war-paint from their faces.
Clear above them flowed the water,
Clear and limpid from the footprints
Of the Master of Life descending;
Dark below them flowed the water,
Soiled and stained with streaks of crimson,
As if blood were mingled with it!
  From the river came the warriors,
Clean and washed from all their war-paint;
On the banks their clubs they buried,
Buried all their warlike weapons.
Gitche Manito, the mighty,
The Great Spirit, the creator,
Smiled upon his helpless children!
  And in silence all the warriors
Broke the red stone of the quarry,
Smoothed and formed it into Peace-Pipes,
Broke the long reeds by the river,
Decked them with their brightest feathers,
And departed each one homeward,
While the Master of Life, ascending,
Through the opening of cloud-curtains,
Through the doorways of the heaven,
Vanished from before their faces,
In the smoke that rolled around him,
The Pukwana of the Peace-Pipe!



II

The Four Winds

"Honor be to Mudjekeewis!"
Cried the warriors, cried the old men,
When he came in triumph homeward
With the sacred Belt of Wampum,
From the regions of the North-Wind,
From the kingdom of Wabasso,
From the land of the White Rabbit.
  He had stolen the Belt of Wampum
From the neck of Mishe-Mokwa,
From the Great Bear of the mountains,
From the terror of the nations,
As he lay asleep and cumbrous
On the summit of the mountains,
Like a rock with mosses on it,
Spotted brown and gray with mosses.
  Silently he stole upon him,
Till the red nails of the monster
Almost touched him, almost scared him,
Till the hot breath of his nostrils
Warmed the hands of Mudjekeewis,
As he drew the Belt of Wampum
Over the round ears, that heard not,
Over the small eyes, that saw not,
Over the long nose and nostrils,
The black muffle of the nostrils,
Out of which the heavy breathing
Warmed the hands of Mudjekeewis.
  Then he swung aloft his war-club,
Shouted loud and long his war-cry,
Smote the mighty Mishe-Mokwa
In the middle of the forehead,
Right between the eyes he smote him.
  With the heavy blow bewildered,
Rose the Great Bear of the mountains;
But his knees beneath him trembled,
And he whimpered like a woman,
As he reeled and staggered forward,
As he sat upon his haunches;
And the mighty Mudjekeewis,
Standing fearlessly before him,
Taunted him in loud derision,
Spake disdainfully in this wise:--
  "Hark you, Bear! you are a coward;
And no Brave, as you pretended;
Else you would not cry and whimper
Like a miserable woman!
Bear! you know our tribes are hostile,
Long have been at war together;
Now you find that we are strongest,
You go sneaking in the forest,
You go hiding in the mountains!
Had you conquered me in battle
Not a groan would I have uttered;
But you, Bear! sit here and whimper,
And disgrace your tribe by crying,
Like a wretched Shaugodaya,
Like a cowardly old woman!"
  Then again he raised his war-club,
Smote again the Mishe-Mokwa
In the middle of his forehead,
Broke his skull, as ice is broken
When one goes to fish in Winter.
Thus was slain the Mishe-Mokwa,
He the Great Bear of the mountains,
He the terror of the nations.
  "Honor be to Mudjekeewis!"
With a shout exclaimed the people,
"Honor be to Mudjekeewis!
Henceforth he shall be the West-Wind,
And hereafter and forever
Shall he hold supreme dominion
Over all the winds of heaven.
Call him no more Mudjekeewis,
Call him Kabeyun, the West-Wind!"
  Thus was Mudjekeewis chosen
Father of the Winds of Heaven.
For himself he kept the West-Wind,
Gave the others to his children;
Unto Wabun gave the East-Wind,
Gave the South to Shawondasee,
And the North-Wind, wild and cruel,
To the fierce Kabibonokka.
  Young and beautiful was Wabun;
He it was who brought the morning,
He it was whose silver arrows
Chased the dark o'er hill and valley;
He it was whose cheeks were painted
With the brightest streaks of crimson,
And whose voice awoke the village,
Called the deer, and called the hunter.
  Lonely in the sky was Wabun;
Though the birds sang gayly to him,
Though the wild-flowers of the meadow
Filled the air with odors for him,
Though the forests and the rivers
Sang and shouted at his coming,
Still his heart was sad within him,
For he was alone in heaven.
  But one morning, gazing earthward,
While the village still was sleeping,
And the fog lay on the river,
Like a ghost, that goes at sunrise,
He beheld a maiden walking
All alone upon a meadow,
Gathering water-flags and rushes
By a river in the meadow.
  Every morning, gazing earthward,
Still the first thing he beheld there
Was her blue eyes looking at him,
Two blue lakes among the rushes.
And he loved the lonely maiden,
Who thus waited for his coming;
For they both were solitary,
She on earth and he in heaven.
  And he wooed her with caresses,
Wooed her with his smile of sunshine,
With his flattering words he wooed her,
With his sighing and his singing,
Gentlest whispers in the branches,
Softest music, sweetest odors,
Till he drew her to his bosom,
Folded in his robes of crimson,
Till into a star he changed her,
Trembling still upon his bosom;
And forever in the heavens
They are seen together walking,
Wabun and the Wabun-Annung,
Wabun and the Star of Morning.
  But the fierce Kabibonokka
Had his dwelling among icebergs,
In the everlasting snow-drifts,
In the kingdom of Wabasso,
In the land of the White Rabbit.
He it was whose hand in Autumn
Painted all the trees with scarlet,
Stained the leaves with red and yellow;
He it was who sent the snow-flake,
Sifting, hissing through the forest,
Froze the ponds, the lakes, the rivers,
Drove the loon and sea-gull southward,
Drove the cormorant and curlew
To their nests of sedge and sea-tang
In the realms of Shawondasee.
  Once the fierce Kabibonokka
Issued from his lodge of snow-drifts
From his home among the icebergs,
And his hair, with snow besprinkled,
Streamed behind him like a river,
Like a black and wintry river,
As he howled and hurried southward,
Over frozen lakes and moorlands.
  There among the reeds and rushes
Found he Shingebis, the diver,
Trailing strings of fish behind him,
O'er the frozen fens and moorlands,
Lingering still among the moorlands,
Though his tribe had long departed
To the land of Shawondasee.
  Cried the fierce Kabibonokka,
"Who is this that dares to brave me?
Dares to stay in my dominions,
When the Wawa has departed,
When the wild-goose has gone southward,
And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
Long ago departed southward?
I will go into his wigwam,
I will put his smouldering fire out!"
  And at night Kabibonokka,
To the lodge came wild and wailing,
Heaped the snow in drifts about it,
Shouted down into the smoke-flue,
Shook the lodge-poles in his fury,
Flapped the curtain of the door-way.
Shingebis, the diver, feared not,
Shingebis, the diver, cared not;
Four great logs had he for firewood,
One for each moon of the winter,
And for food the fishes served him.
By his blazing fire he sat there,
Warm and merry, eating, laughing,
Singing, "O Kabibonokka,
You are but my fellow-mortal!"
  Then Kabibonokka entered,
And though Shingebis, the diver,
Felt his presence by the coldness,
Felt his icy breath upon him,
Still he did not cease his singing,
Still he did not leave his laughing,
Only turned the log a little,
Only made the fire burn brighter,
Made the sparks fly up the smoke-flue.
  From Kabibonokka's forehead,
From his snow-besprinkled tresses,
Drops of sweat fell fast and heavy,
Making dints upon the ashes,
As along the eaves of lodges,
As from drooping boughs of hemlock,
Drips the melting snow in spring-time,
Making hollows in the snow-drifts.
  Till at last he rose defeated,
Could not bear the heat and laughter,
Could not bear the merry singing,
But rushed headlong through the door-way,
Stamped upon the crusted snow-drifts,
Stamped upon the lakes and rivers,
Made the snow upon them harder,
Made the ice upon them thicker,
Challenged Shingebis, the diver,
To come forth and wrestle with him,
To come forth and wrestle naked
On the frozen fens and moorlands.
  Forth went Shingebis, the diver,
Wrestled all night with the North-Wind,
Wrestled naked on the moorlands
With the fierce Kabibonokka,
Till his panting breath grew fainter,
Till his frozen grasp grew feebler,
Till he reeled and staggered backward,
And retreated, baffled, beaten,
To the kingdom of Wabasso,
To the land of the White Rabbit,
Hearing still the gusty laughter,
Hearing Shingebis, the diver,
Singing, "O Kabibonokka,
You are but my fellow-mortal!"
  Shawondasee, fat and lazy,
Had his dwelling far to southward,
In the drowsy, dreamy sunshine,
In the never-ending Summer.
He it was who sent the wood-birds,
Sent the robin, the Opechee,
Sent the bluebird, the Owaissa,
Sent the Shawshaw, sent the swallow,
Sent the wild-goose, Wawa, northward,
Sent the melons and tobacco,
And the grapes in purple clusters.
  From his pipe the smoke ascending
Filled the sky with haze and vapor,
Filled the air with dreamy softness,
Gave a twinkle to the water,
Touched the rugged hills with smoothness,
Brought the tender Indian Summer
To the melancholy north-land,
In the dreary Moon of Snow-shoes.
  Listless, careless Shawondasee!
In his life he had one shadow,
In his heart one sorrow had he.
Once, as he was gazing northward,
Far away upon a prairie
He beheld a maiden standing,
Saw a tall and slender maiden
All alone upon a prairie;
Brightest green were all her garments,
And her hair was like the sunshine.
  Day by day he gazed upon her,
Day by day he sighed with passion,
Day by day his heart within him
Grew more hot with love and longing
For the maid with yellow tresses.
But he was too fat and lazy
To bestir himself and woo her;
Yes, too indolent and easy
To pursue her and persuade her;
So he only gazed upon her,
Only sat and sighed with passion
For the maiden of the prairie.
  Till one morning, looking northward,
He beheld her yellow tresses
Changed and covered o'er with whiteness,
Covered as with whitest snow-flakes.
"Ah! my brother from the North-land,
From the kingdom of Wabasso,
From the land of the White Rabbit!
You have stolen the maiden from me,
You have laid your hand upon her,
You have wooed and won my maiden,
With your stories of the North-land!"
  Thus the wretched Shawondasee
Breathed into the air his sorrow;
And the South-Wind o'er the prairie
Wandered warm with sighs of passion,
With the sighs of Shawondasee,
Till the air seemed full of snow-flakes,
Full of thistle-down the prairie,
And the maid with hair like sunshine
Vanished from his sight forever;
Never more did Shawondasee
See the maid with yellow tresses!
  Poor, deluded Shawondasee!
'T was no woman that you gazed at,
'T was no maiden that you sighed for,
'T was the prairie dandelion
That through all the dreamy Summer
You had gazed at with such longing,
You had sighed for with such passion,
And had puffed away forever,
Blown into the air with sighing.
Ah! deluded Shawondasee!
  Thus the Four Winds were divided;
Thus the sons of Mudjekeewis
Had their stations in the heavens,
At the corners of the heavens;
For himself the West-Wind only
Kept the mighty Mudjekeewis.



III

HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD

Downward through the evening twilight,
In the days that are forgotten,
In the unremembered ages,
From the full moon fell Nokomis,
Fell the beautiful Nokomis,
She a wife, but not a mother.
  She was sporting with her women,
Swinging in a swing of grape-vines,
When her rival, the rejected,
Full of jealousy and hatred,
Cut the leafy swing asunder,
Cut in twain the twisted grape-vines,
And Nokomis fell affrighted
Downward through the evening twilight,
On the Muskoday, the meadow,
On the prairie full of blossoms.
"See! a star falls!" said the people;
"From the sky a star is falling!"
  There among the ferns and mosses,
There among the prairie lilies,
On the Muskoday, the meadow,
In the moonlight and the starlight,
Fair Nokomis bore a daughter.
And she called her name Wenonah,
As the first-born of her daughters.
And the daughter of Nokomis
Grew up like the prairie lilies,
Grew a tall and slender maiden,
With the beauty of the moonlight,
With the beauty of the starlight.
  And Nokomis warned her often,
Saying oft, and oft repeating,
"Oh, beware of Mudjekeewis,
Of the West-Wind, Mudjekeewis;
Listen not to what he tells you;
Lie not down upon the meadow,
Stoop not down among the lilies,
Lest the West-Wind come and harm you!"
  But she heeded not the warning,
Heeded not those words of wisdom,
And the West-Wind came at evening,
Walking lightly o'er the prairie,
Whispering to the leaves and blossoms,
Bending low the flowers and grasses,
Found the beautiful Wenonah,
Lying there among the lilies,
Wooed her with his words of sweetness,
Wooed her with his soft caresses,
Till she bore a son in sorrow,
Bore a son of love and sorrow.
  Thus was born my Hiawatha,
Thus was born the child of wonder;
But the daughter of Nokomis,
Hiawatha's gentle mother,
In her anguish died deserted
By the West-Wind, false and faithless,
By the heartless Mudjekeewis.
  For her daughter long and loudly
Wailed and wept the sad Nokomis;
"Oh that I were dead!" she murmured,
"Oh that I were dead, as thou art!
No more work, and no more weeping,
Wahonowin!  Wahonowin!"
  By the shores of Gitche Gumee,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
Dark behind it rose the forest,
Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
Rose the firs with cones upon them;
Bright before it beat the water,
Beat the clear and sunny water,
Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.
  There the wrinkled old Nokomis
Nursed the little Hiawatha,
Rocked him in his linden cradle,
Bedded soft in moss and rushes,
Safely bound with reindeer sinews;
Stilled his fretful wail by saying,
"Hush! the Naked Bear will hear thee!"
Lulled him into slumber, singing,
"Ewa-yea! my little owlet!
Who is this, that lights the wigwam?
With his great eyes lights the wigwam?
Ewa-yea! my little owlet!"
  Many things Nokomis taught him
Of the stars that shine in heaven;
Showed him Ishkoodah, the comet,
Ishkoodah, with fiery tresses;
Showed the Death-Dance of the spirits,
Warriors with their plumes and war-clubs,
Flaring far away to northward
In the frosty nights of Winter;
Showed the broad white road in heaven,
Pathway of the ghosts, the shadows,
Running straight across the heavens,
Crowded with the ghosts, the shadows.
  At the door on summer evenings
Sat the little Hiawatha;
Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
Heard the lapping of the water,
Sounds of music, words of wonder;
'Minne-wawa!" said the Pine-trees,
Mudway-aushka!" said the water.
  Saw the fire-fly, Wah-wah-taysee,
Flitting through the dusk of evening,
With the twinkle of its candle
Lighting up the brakes and bushes,
And he sang the song of children,
Sang the song Nokomis taught him:
"Wah-wah-taysee, little fire-fly,
Little, flitting, white-fire insect,
Little, dancing, white-fire creature,
Light me with your little candle,
Ere upon my bed I lay me,
Ere in sleep I close my eyelids!"
  Saw the moon rise from the water
Rippling, rounding from the water,
Saw the flecks and shadows on it,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
And the good Nokomis answered:
"Once a warrior, very angry,
Seized his grandmother, and threw her
Up into the sky at midnight;
Right against the moon he threw her;
'T is her body that you see there."
  Saw the rainbow in the heaven,
In the eastern sky, the rainbow,
Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
And the good Nokomis answered:
"'T is the heaven of flowers you see there;
All the wild-flowers of the forest,
All the lilies of the prairie,
When on earth they fade and perish,
Blossom in that heaven above us."
  When he heard the owls at midnight,
Hooting, laughing in the forest,
"What is that?" he cried in terror,
"What is that," he said, "Nokomis?"
And the good Nokomis answered:
"That is but the owl and owlet,
Talking in their native language,
Talking, scolding at each other."
  Then the little Hiawatha
Learned of every bird its language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How they built their nests in Summer,
Where they hid themselves in Winter,
Talked with them whene'er he met them,
Called them "Hiawatha's Chickens."
  Of all beasts he learned the language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How the beavers built their lodges,
Where the squirrels hid their acorns,
How the reindeer ran so swiftly,
Why the rabbit was so timid,
Talked with them whene'er he met them,
Called them "Hiawatha's Brothers."
  Then Iagoo, the great boaster,
He the marvellous story-teller,
He the traveller and the talker,
He the friend of old Nokomis,
Made a bow for Hiawatha;
From a branch of ash he made it,
From an oak-bough made the arrows,
Tipped with flint, and winged with feathers,
And the cord he made of deer-skin.
  Then he said to Hiawatha:
"Go, my son, into the forest,
Where the red deer herd together,
Kill for us a famous roebuck,
Kill for us a deer with antlers!"
  Forth into the forest straightway
All alone walked Hiawatha
Proudly, with his bow and arrows;
And the birds sang round him, o'er him,
"Do not shoot us, Hiawatha!"
Sang the robin, the Opechee,
Sang the bluebird, the Owaissa,
"Do not shoot us, Hiawatha!"
  Up the oak-tree, close beside him,
Sprang the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
In and out among the branches,
Coughed and chattered from the oak-tree,
Laughed, and said between his laughing,
"Do not shoot me, Hiawatha!"
  And the rabbit from his pathway
Leaped aside, and at a distance
Sat erect upon his haunches,
Half in fear and half in frolic,
Saying to the little hunter,
"Do not shoot me, Hiawatha!"
  But he heeded not, nor heard them,
For his thoughts were with the red deer;
On their tracks his eyes were fastened,
Leading downward to the river,
To the ford across the river,
And as one in slumber walked he.
  Hidden in the alder-bushes,
There he waited till the deer came,
Till he saw two antlers lifted,
Saw two eyes look from the thicket,
Saw two nostrils point to windward,
And a deer came down the pathway,
Flecked with leafy light and shadow.
And his heart within him fluttered,
Trembled like the leaves above him,
Like the birch-leaf palpitated,
As the deer came down the pathway.
  Then, upon one knee uprising,
Hiawatha aimed an arrow;
Scarce a twig moved with his motion,
Scarce a leaf was stirred or rustled,
But the wary roebuck started,
Stamped with all his hoofs together,
Listened with one foot uplifted,
Leaped as if to meet the arrow;
Ah! the singing, fatal arrow,
Like a wasp it buzzed and stung him!
  Dead he lay there in the forest,
By the ford across the river;
Beat his timid heart no longer,
But the heart of Hiawatha
Throbbed and shouted and exulted,
As he bore the red deer homeward,
And Iagoo and Nokomis
Hailed his coming with applauses.
  From the red deer's hide Nokomis
Made a cloak for Hiawatha,
From the red deer's flesh Nokomis
Made a banquet to his honor.
All the village came and feasted,
All the guests praised Hiawatha,
Called him Strong-Heart, Soan-ge-taha!
Called him Loon-Heart, Mahn-go-taysee!



IV

HIAWATHA AND MUDJEKEEWIS

Out of childhood into manhood
Now had grown my Hiawatha,
Skilled in all the craft of hunters,
Learned in all the lore of old men,
In all youthful sports and pastimes,
In all manly arts and labors.
  Swift of foot was Hiawatha;
He could shoot an arrow from him,
And run forward with such fleetness,
That the arrow fell behind him!
Strong of arm was Hiawatha;
He could shoot ten arrows upward,
Shoot them with such strength and swiftness,
That the tenth had left the bow-string
Ere the first to earth had fallen!
  He had mittens, Minjekahwun,
Magic mittens made of deer-skin;
When upon his hands he wore them,
He could smite the rocks asunder,
He could grind them into powder.
He had moccasins enchanted,
Magic moccasins of deer-skin;
When he bound them round his ankles,
When upon his feet he tied them,
At each stride a mile he measured!
  Much he questioned old Nokomis
Of his father Mudjekeewis;
Learned from her the fatal secret
Of the beauty of his mother,
Of the falsehood of his father;
And his heart was hot within him,
Like a living coal his heart was.
  Then he said to old Nokomis,
"I will go to Mudjekeewis,
See how fares it with my father,
At the doorways of the West-Wind,
At the portals of the Sunset!"
  From his lodge went Hiawatha,
Dressed for travel, armed for hunting;
Dressed in deer-skin shirt and leggings,
Richly wrought with quills and wampum;
On his head his eagle-feathers,
Round his waist his belt of wampum,
In his hand his bow of ash-wood,
Strung with sinews of the reindeer;
In his quiver oaken arrows,
Tipped with jasper, winged with feathers;
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
With his moccasins enchanted.
  Warning said the old Nokomis,
"Go not forth, O Hiawatha!
To the kingdom of the West-Wind,
To the realms of Mudjekeewis,
Lest he harm you with his magic,
Lest he kill you with his cunning!"
  But the fearless Hiawatha
Heeded not her woman's warning;
Forth he strode into the forest,
At each stride a mile he measured;
Lurid seemed the sky above him,
Lurid seemed the earth beneath him,
Hot and close the air around him,
Filled with smoke and fiery vapors,
As of burning woods and prairies,
For his heart was hot within him,
Like a living coal his heart was.
  So he journeyed westward, westward,
Left the fleetest deer behind him,
Left the antelope and bison;
Crossed the rushing Esconaba,
Crossed the mighty Mississippi,
Passed the Mountains of the Prairie,
Passed the land of Crows and Foxes,
Passed the dwellings of the Blackfeet,
Came unto the Rocky Mountains,
To the kingdom of the West-Wind,
Where upon the gusty summits
Sat the ancient Mudjekeewis,
Ruler of the winds of heaven.
  Filled with awe was Hiawatha
At the aspect of his father.
On the air about him wildly
Tossed and streamed his cloudy tresses,
Gleamed like drifting snow his tresses,
Glared like Ishkoodah, the comet,
Like the star with fiery tresses.
  Filled with joy was Mudjekeewis
When he looked on Hiawatha,
Saw his youth rise up before him
In the face of Hiawatha,
Saw the beauty of Wenonah
From the grave rise up before him.
  "Welcome!" said he, "Hiawatha,
To the kingdom of the West-Wind!
Long have I been waiting for you!
Youth is lovely, age is lonely,
Youth is fiery, age is frosty;
You bring back the days departed,
You bring back my youth of passion,
And the beautiful Wenonah!"
  Many days they talked together,
Questioned, listened, waited, answered;
Much the mighty Mudjekeewis
Boasted of his ancient prowess,
Of his perilous adventures,
His indomitable courage,
His invulnerable body.
  Patiently sat Hiawatha,
Listening to his father's boasting;
With a smile he sat and listened,
Uttered neither threat nor menace,
Neither word nor look betrayed him,
But his heart was hot within him,
Like a living coal his heart was.
  Then he said, "O Mudjekeewis,
Is there nothing that can harm you?
Nothing that you are afraid of?"
And the mighty Mudjekeewis,
Grand and gracious in his boasting,
Answered, saying, "There is nothing,
Nothing but the black rock yonder,
Nothing but the fatal Wawbeek!"
  And he looked at Hiawatha
With a wise look and benignant,
With a countenance paternal,
Looked with pride upon the beauty
Of his tall and graceful figure,
Saying, "O my Hiawatha!
Is there anything can harm you?
Anything you are afraid of?"
  But the wary Hiawatha
Paused awhile, as if uncertain,
Held his peace, as if resolving,
And then answered, "There is nothing,
Nothing but the bulrush yonder,
Nothing but the great Apukwa!"
  And as Mudjekeewis, rising,
Stretched his hand to pluck the bulrush,
Hiawatha cried in terror,
Cried in well-dissembled terror,
"Kago! kago! do not touch it!"
"Ah, kaween!" said Mudjekeewis,
"No indeed, I will not touch it!"
  Then they talked of other matters;
First of Hiawatha's brothers,
First of Wabun, of the East-Wind,
Of the South-Wind, Shawondasee,
Of the North, Kabibonokka;
Then of Hiawatha's mother,
Of the beautiful Wenonah,
Of her birth upon the meadow,
Of her death, as old Nokomis
Had remembered and related.
  And he cried, "O Mudjekeewis,
It was you who killed Wenonah,
Took her young life and her beauty,
Broke the Lily of the Prairie,
Trampled it beneath your footsteps;
You confess it! you confess it!"
And the mighty Mudjekeewis
Tossed upon the wind his tresses,
Bowed his hoary head in anguish,
With a silent nod assented.
  Then up started Hiawatha,
And with threatening look and gesture
Laid his hand upon the black rock,
On the fatal Wawbeek laid it,
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
Rent the jutting crag asunder,
Smote and crushed it into fragments,
Hurled them madly at his father,
The remorseful Mudjekeewis,
For his heart was hot within him,
Like a living coal his heart was.
  But the ruler of the West-Wind
Blew the fragments backward from him,
With the breathing of his nostrils,
With the tempest of his anger,
Blew them back at his assailant;
Seized the bulrush, the Apukwa,
Dragged it with its roots and fibres
From the margin of the meadow,
From its ooze the giant bulrush;
Long and loud laughed Hiawatha!
  Then began the deadly conflict,
Hand to hand among the mountains;
From his eyry screamed the eagle,
The Keneu, the great war-eagle,
Sat upon the crags around them,
Wheeling flapped his wings above them.
  Like a tall tree in the tempest
Bent and lashed the giant bulrush;
And in masses huge and heavy
Crashing fell the fatal Wawbeek;
Till the earth shook with the tumult
And confusion of the battle,
And the air was full of shoutings,
And the thunder of the mountains,
Starting, answered, "Baim-wawa!"
  Back retreated Mudjekeewis,
Rushing westward o'er the mountains,
Stumbling westward down the mountains,
Three whole days retreated fighting,
Still pursued by Hiawatha
To the doorways of the West-Wind,
To the portals of the Sunset,
To the earth's remotest border,
Where into the empty spaces
Sinks the sun, as a flamingo
Drops into her nest at nightfall,
In the melancholy marshes.
  "Hold!" at length cried Mudjekeewis,
"Hold, my son, my Hiawatha!
'T is impossible to kill me,
For you cannot kill the immortal.
I have put you to this trial,
But to know and prove your courage;
Now receive the prize of valor!
  "Go back to your home and people,
Live among them, toil among them,
Cleanse the earth from all that harms it,
Clear the fishing-grounds and rivers,
Slay all monsters and magicians,
All the Wendigoes, the giants,
All the serpents, the Kenabeeks,
As I slew the Mishe-Mokwa,
Slew the Great Bear of the mountains.
  "And at last when Death draws near you,
When the awful eyes of Pauguk
Glare upon you in the darkness,
I will share my kingdom with you,
Ruler shall you be thenceforward
Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
Of the home-wind, the Keewaydin."
  Thus was fought that famous battle
In the dreadful days of Shah-shah,
In the days long since departed,
In the kingdom of the West-Wind.
Still the hunter sees its traces
Scattered far o'er hill and valley;
Sees the giant bulrush growing
By the ponds and water-courses,
Sees the masses of the Wawbeek
Lying still in every valley.
  Homeward now went Hiawatha;
Pleasant was the landscape round him,
Pleasant was the air above him,
For the bitterness of anger
Had departed wholly from him,
From his brain the thought of vengeance,
From his heart the burning fever.
  Only once his pace he slackened,
Only once he paused or halted,
Paused to purchase heads of arrows
Of the ancient Arrow-maker,
In the land of the Dacotahs,
Where the Falls of Minnehaha
Flash and gleam among the oak-trees,
Laugh and leap into the valley.
  There the ancient Arrow-maker
Made his arrow-heads of sandstone,
Arrow-heads of chalcedony,
Arrow-heads of flint and jasper,
Smoothed and sharpened at the edges,
Hard and polished, keen and costly.
  With him dwelt his dark-eyed daughter,
Wayward as the Minnehaha,
With her moods of shade and sunshine,
Eyes that smiled and frowned alternate,
Feet as rapid as the river,
Tresses flowing like the water,
And as musical a laughter;
And he named her from the river,
From the water-fall he named her,
Minnehaha, Laughing Water.
  Was it then for heads of arrows,
Arrow-heads of chalcedony,
Arrow-heads of flint and jasper,
That my Hiawatha halted
In the land of the Dacotahs?
  Was it not to see the maiden,
See the face of Laughing Water
Peeping from behind the curtain,
Hear the rustling of her garments
From behind the waving curtain,
As one sees the Minnehaha
Gleaming, glancing through the branches,
As one hears the Laughing Water
From behind its screen of branches?
  Who shall say what thoughts and visions
Fill the fiery brains of young men?
Who shall say what dreams of beauty
Filled the heart of Hiawatha?
All he told to old Nokomis,
When he reached the lodge at sunset,
Was the meeting with his father,
Was his fight with Mudjekeewis;
Not a word he said of arrows,
Not a word of Laughing Water.



V

HIAWATHA'S FASTING

You shall hear how Hiawatha
Prayed and fasted in the forest,
Not for greater skill in hunting,
Not for greater craft in fishing,
Not for triumphs in the battle,
And renown among the warriors,
But for profit of the people,
For advantage of the nations.
  First he built a lodge for fasting,
Built a wigwam in the forest,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
In the blithe and pleasant Spring-time,
In the Moon of Leaves he built it,
And, with dreams and visions many,
Seven whole days and nights he fasted.
  On the first day of his fasting
Through the leafy woods he wandered;
Saw the deer start from the thicket,
Saw the rabbit in his burrow,
Heard the pheasant, Bena, drumming,
Heard the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
Rattling in his hoard of acorns,
Saw the pigeon, the Omeme,
Building nests among the pine-trees,
And in flocks the wild-goose, Wawa,
Flying to the fen-lands northward,
Whirring, wailing far above him.
"Master of Life!" he cried, desponding,
"Must our lives depend on these things?"
  On the next day of his fasting
By the river's brink he wandered,
Through the Muskoday, the meadow,
Saw the wild rice, Mahnomonee,
Saw the blueberry, Meenahga,
And the strawberry, Odahmin,
And the gooseberry, Shahbomin,
And the grape-vine, the Bemahgut,
Trailing o'er the alder-branches,
Filling all the air with fragrance!
"Master of Life!" he cried, desponding,
"Must our lives depend on these things?"
  On the third day of his fasting
By the lake he sat and pondered,
By the still, transparent water;
Saw the sturgeon, Nahma, leaping,
Scattering drops like beads of wampum,
Saw the yellow perch, the Sahwa,
Like a sunbeam in the water,
Saw the pike, the Maskenozha,
And the herring, Okahahwis,
And the Shawgashee, the crawfish!
"Master of Life!" he cried, desponding,
"Must our lives depend on these things?"
  On the fourth day of his fasting
In his lodge he lay exhausted;
From his couch of leaves and branches
Gazing with half-open eyelids,
Full of shadowy dreams and visions,
On the dizzy, swimming landscape,
On the gleaming of the water,
On the splendor of the sunset.
  And he saw a youth approaching,
Dressed in garments green and yellow,
Coming through the purple twilight,
Through the splendor of the sunset;
Plumes of green bent o'er his forehead,
And his hair was soft and golden.
  Standing at the open doorway,
Long he looked at Hiawatha,
Looked with pity and compassion
On his wasted form and features,
And, in accents like the sighing
Of the South-Wind in the tree-tops,
Said he, "O my Hiawatha!
All your prayers are heard in heaven,
For you pray not like the others;
Not for greater skill in hunting,
Not for greater craft in fishing,
Not for triumph in the battle,
Nor renown among the warriors,
But for profit of the people,
For advantage of the nations.
  "From the Master of Life descending,
I, the friend of man, Mondamin,
Come to warn you and instruct you,
How by struggle and by labor
You shall gain what you have prayed for.
Rise up from your bed of branches,
Rise, O youth, and wrestle with me!"
  Faint with famine, Hiawatha
Started from his bed of branches,
From the twilight of his wigwam
Forth into the flush of sunset
Came, and wrestled with Mondamin;
At his touch he felt new courage
Throbbing in his brain and bosom,
Felt new life and hope and vigor
Run through every nerve and fibre.
  So they wrestled there together
In the glory of the sunset,
And the more they strove and struggled,
Stronger still grew Hiawatha;
Till the darkness fell around them,
And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
From her nest among the pine-trees,
Gave a cry of lamentation,
Gave a scream of pain and famine.
  "'T is enough!" then said Mondamin,
Smiling upon Hiawatha,
"But tomorrow, when the sun sets,
I will come again to try you."
And he vanished, and was seen not;
Whether sinking as the rain sinks,
Whether rising as the mists rise,
Hiawatha saw not, knew not,
Only saw that he had vanished,
Leaving him alone and fainting,
With the misty lake below him,
And the reeling stars above him.
  On the morrow and the next day,
When the sun through heaven descending,
Like a red and burning cinder
From the hearth of the Great Spirit,
Fell into the western waters,
Came Mondamin for the trial,
For the strife with Hiawatha;
Came as silent as the dew comes,
From the empty air appearing,
Into empty air returning,
Taking shape when earth it touches,
But invisible to all men
In its coming and its going.
  Thrice they wrestled there together
In the glory of the sunset,
Till the darkness fell around them,
Till the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
From her nest among the pine-trees,
Uttered her loud cry of famine,
And Mondamin paused to listen.
  Tall and beautiful he stood there,
In his garments green and yellow;
To and fro his plumes above him,
Waved and nodded with his breathing,
And the sweat of the encounter
Stood like drops of dew upon him.
  And he cried, "O Hiawatha!
Bravely have you wrestled with me,
Thrice have wrestled stoutly with me,
And the Master of Life, who sees us,
He will give to you the triumph!"
  Then he smiled, and said: "To-morrow
Is the last day of your conflict,
Is the last day of your fasting.
You will conquer and o'ercome me;
Make a bed for me to lie in,
Where the rain may fall upon me,
Where the sun may come and warm me;
Strip these garments, green and yellow,
Strip this nodding plumage from me,
Lay me in the earth, and make it
Soft and loose and light above me.
  "Let no hand disturb my slumber,
Let no weed nor worm molest me,
Let not Kahgahgee, the raven,
Come to haunt me and molest me,
Only come yourself to watch me,
Till I wake, and start, and quicken,
Till I leap into the sunshine."
  And thus saying, he departed;
Peacefully slept Hiawatha,
But he heard the Wawonaissa,
Heard the whippoorwill complaining,
Perched upon his lonely wigwam;
Heard the rushing Sebowisha,
Heard the rivulet rippling near him,
Talking to the darksome forest;
Heard the sighing of the branches,
As they lifted and subsided
At the passing of the night-wind,
Heard them, as one hears in slumber
Far-off murmurs, dreamy whispers:
Peacefully slept Hiawatha.
  On the morrow came Nokomis,
On the seventh day of his fasting,
Came with food for Hiawatha,
Came imploring and bewailing,
Lest his hunger should o'ercome him,
Lest his fasting should be fatal.
  But he tasted not, and touched not,
Only said to her, "Nokomis,
Wait until the sun is setting,
Till the darkness falls around us,
Till the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
Crying from the desolate marshes,
Tells us that the day is ended."
  Homeward weeping went Nokomis,
Sorrowing for her Hiawatha,
Fearing lest his strength should fail him,
Lest his fasting should be fatal.
He meanwhile sat weary waiting
For the coming of Mondamin,
Till the shadows, pointing eastward,
Lengthened over field and forest,
Till the sun dropped from the heaven,
Floating on the waters westward,
As a red leaf in the Autumn
Falls and floats upon the water,
Falls and sinks into its bosom.
  And behold! the young Mondamin,
With his soft and shining tresses,
With his garments green and yellow,
With his long and glossy plumage,
Stood and beckoned at the doorway.
And as one in slumber walking,
Pale and haggard, but undaunted,
From the wigwam Hiawatha
Came and wrestled with Mondamin.
  Round about him spun the landscape,
Sky and forest reeled together,
And his strong heart leaped within him,
As the sturgeon leaps and struggles
In a net to break its meshes.
Like a ring of fire around him
Blazed and flared the red horizon,
And a hundred suns seemed looking
At the combat of the wrestlers.
  Suddenly upon the greensward
All alone stood Hiawatha,
Panting with his wild exertion,
Palpitating with the struggle;
And before him breathless, lifeless,
Lay the youth, with hair dishevelled,
Plumage torn, and garments tattered,
Dead he lay there in the sunset.
  And victorious Hiawatha
Made the grave as he commanded,
Stripped the garments from Mondamin,
Stripped his tattered plumage from him,
Laid him in the earth, and made it
Soft and loose and light above him;
And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
From the melancholy moorlands,
Gave a cry of lamentation,
Gave a cry of pain and anguish!
  Homeward then went Hiawatha
To the lodge of old Nokomis,
And the seven days of his fasting
Were accomplished and completed.
But the place was not forgotten
Where he wrestled with Mondamin;
Nor forgotten nor neglected
Was the grave where lay Mondamin,
Sleeping in the rain and sunshine,
Where his scattered plumes and garments
Faded in the rain and sunshine.
  Day by day did Hiawatha
Go to wait and watch beside it;
Kept the dark mould soft above it,
Kept it clean from weeds and insects,
Drove away, with scoffs and shoutings,
Kahgahgee, the king of ravens.
  Till at length a small green feather
From the earth shot slowly upward,
Then another and another,
And before the Summer ended
Stood the maize in all its beauty,
With its shining robes about it,
And its long, soft, yellow tresses;
And in rapture Hiawatha
Cried aloud, "It is Mondamin!
Yes, the friend of man, Mondamin!"
  Then he called to old Nokomis
And Iagoo, the great boaster,
Showed them where the maize was growing,
Told them of his wondrous vision,
Of his wrestling and his triumph,
Of this new gift to the nations,
Which should be their food forever.
  And still later, when the Autumn
Changed the long, green leaves to yellow,
And the soft and juicy kernels
Grew like wampum hard and yellow,
Then the ripened ears he gathered,
Stripped the withered husks from off them,
As he once had stripped the wrestler,
Gave the first Feast of Mondamin,
And made known unto the people
This new gift of the Great Spirit.



VI

HIAWATHA'S FRIENDS

Two good friends had Hiawatha,
Singled out from all the others,
Bound to him in closest union,
And to whom he gave the right hand
Of his heart, in joy and sorrow;
Chibiabos, the musician,
And the very strong man, Kwasind.
  Straight between them ran the pathway,
Never grew the grass upon it;
Singing birds, that utter falsehoods,
Story-tellers, mischief-makers,
Found no eager ear to listen,
Could not breed ill-will between them,
For they kept each other's counsel,
Spake with naked hearts together,
Pondering much and much contriving
How the tribes of men might prosper.
  Most beloved by Hiawatha
Was the gentle Chibiabos,
He the best of all musicians,
He the sweetest of all singers.
Beautiful and childlike was he,
Brave as man is, soft as woman,
Pliant as a wand of willow,
Stately as a deer with antlers.
  When he sang, the village listened;
All the warriors gathered round him,
All the women came to hear him;
Now he stirred their souls to passion,
Now he melted them to pity.
  From the hollow reeds he fashioned
Flutes so musical and mellow,
That the brook, the Sebowisha,
Ceased to murmur in the woodland,
That the wood-birds ceased from singing,
And the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
Ceased his chatter in the oak-tree,
And the rabbit, the Wabasso,
Sat upright to look and listen.
  Yes, the brook, the Sebowisha,
Pausing, said, "O Chibiabos,
Teach my waves to flow in music,
Softly as your words in singing!"
  Yes, the bluebird, the Owaissa,
Envious, said, "O Chibiabos,
Teach me tones as wild and wayward,
Teach me songs as full of frenzy!"
  Yes, the robin, the Opechee,
Joyous, said, "O Chibiabos,
Teach me tones as sweet and tender,
Teach me songs as full of gladness!"
  And the whippoorwill, Wawonaissa,
Sobbing, said, "O Chibiabos,
Teach me tones as melancholy,
Teach me songs as full of sadness!"
  All the many sounds of nature
Borrowed sweetness from his singing;
All the hearts of men were softened
By the pathos of his music;
For he sang of peace and freedom,
Sang of beauty, love, and longing;
Sang of death, and life undying
In the Islands of the Blessed,
In the kingdom of Ponemah,
In the land of the Hereafter.
  Very dear to Hiawatha
Was the gentle Chibiabos,
He the best of all musicians,
He the sweetest of all singers;
For his gentleness he loved him,
And the magic of his singing.
  Dear, too, unto Hiawatha
Was the very strong man, Kwasind,
He the strongest of all mortals,
He the mightiest among many;
For his very strength he loved him,
For his strength allied to goodness.
  Idle in his youth was Kwasind,
Very listless, dull, and dreamy,
Never played with other children,
Never fished and never hunted,
Not like other children was he;
But they saw that much he fasted,
Much his Manito entreated,
Much besought his Guardian Spirit.
  "Lazy Kwasind!" said his mother,
"In my work you never help me!
In the Summer you are roaming
Idly in the fields and forests;
In the Winter you are cowering
O'er the firebrands in the wigwam!
In the coldest days of Winter
I must break the ice for fishing;
With my nets you never help me!
At the door my nets are hanging,
Dripping, freezing with the water;
Go and wring them, Yenadizze!
Go and dry them in the sunshine!"
  Slowly, from the ashes, Kwasind
Rose, but made no angry answer;
From the lodge went forth in silence,
Took the nets, that hung together,
Dripping, freezing at the doorway;
Like a wisp of straw he wrung them,
Like a wisp of straw he broke them,
Could not wring them without breaking,
Such the strength was in his fingers.
  "Lazy Kwasind!" said his father,
"In the hunt you never help me;
Every bow you touch is broken,
Snapped asunder every arrow;
Yet come with me to the forest,
You shall bring the hunting homeward."
  Down a narrow pass they wandered,
Where a brooklet led them onward,
Where the trail of deer and bison
Marked the soft mud on the margin,
Till they found all further passage
Shut against them, barred securely
By the trunks of trees uprooted,
Lying lengthwise, lying crosswise,
And forbidding further passage.
  "We must go back," said the old man,
"O'er these logs we cannot clamber;
Not a woodchuck could get through them,
Not a squirrel clamber o'er them!"
And straightway his pipe he lighted,
And sat down to smoke and ponder.
But before his pipe was finished,
Lo! the path was cleared before him;
All the trunks had Kwasind lifted,
To the right hand, to the left hand,
Shot the pine-trees swift as arrows,
Hurled the cedars light as lances.
  "Lazy Kwasind!" said the young men,
As they sported in the meadow:
"Why stand idly looking at us,
Leaning on the rock behind you?
Come and wrestle with the others,
Let us pitch the quoit together!"
  Lazy Kwasind made no answer,
To their challenge made no answer,
Only rose, and slowly turning,
Seized the huge rock in his fingers,
Tore it from its deep foundation,
Poised it in the air a moment,
Pitched it sheer into the river,
Sheer into the swift Pauwating,
Where it still is seen in Summer.
  Once as down that foaming river,
Down the rapids of Pauwating,
Kwasind sailed with his companions,
In the stream he saw a beaver,
Saw Ahmeek, the King of Beavers,
Struggling with the rushing currents,
Rising, sinking in the water.
  Without speaking, without pausing,
Kwasind leaped into the river,
Plunged beneath the bubbling surface,
Through the whirlpools chased the beaver,
Followed him among the islands,
Stayed so long beneath the water,
That his terrified companions
Cried, "Alas! good-by to Kwasind!
We shall never more see Kwasind!"
But he reappeared triumphant,
And upon his shining shoulders
Brought the beaver, dead and dripping,
Brought the King of all the Beavers.
  And these two, as I have told you,
Were the friends of Hiawatha,
Chibiabos, the musician,
And the very strong man, Kwasind.
Long they lived in peace together,
Spake with naked hearts together,
Pondering much and much contriving
How the tribes of men might prosper.



VII

HIAWATHA'S SAILING

"Give me of your bark, O Birch-tree!
Of your yellow bark, O Birch-tree!
Growing by the rushing river,
Tall and stately in the valley!
I a light canoe will build me,
Build a swift Cheemaun for sailing,
That shall float on the river,
Like a yellow leaf in Autumn,
Like a yellow water-lily!
  "Lay aside your cloak, O Birch-tree!
Lay aside your white-skin wrapper,
For the Summer-time is coming,
And the sun is warm in heaven,
And you need no white-skin wrapper!"
  Thus aloud cried Hiawatha
In the solitary forest,
By the rushing Taquamenaw,
When the birds were singing gayly,
In the Moon of Leaves were singing,
And the sun, from sleep awaking,
Started up and said, "Behold me!
Gheezis, the great Sun, behold me!"
  And the tree with all its branches
Rustled in the breeze of morning,
Saying, with a sigh of patience,
"Take my cloak, O Hiawatha!"
  With his knife the tree he girdled;
Just beneath its lowest branches,
Just above the roots, he cut it,
Till the sap came oozing outward;
Down the trunk, from top to bottom,
Sheer he cleft the bark asunder,
With a wooden wedge he raised it,
Stripped it from the trunk unbroken.
  "Give me of your boughs, O Cedar!
Of your strong and pliant branches,
My canoe to make more steady,
Make more strong and firm beneath me!"
  Through the summit of the Cedar
Went a sound, a cry of horror,
Went a murmur of resistance;
But it whispered, bending downward,
'Take my boughs, O Hiawatha!"
  Down he hewed the boughs of cedar,
Shaped them straightway to a framework,
Like two bows he formed and shaped them,
Like two bended bows together.
  "Give me of your roots, O Tamarack!
Of your fibrous roots, O Larch-tree!
My canoe to bind together,
So to bind the ends together
That the water may not enter,
That the river may not wet me!"
  And the Larch, with all its fibres,
Shivered in the air of morning,
Touched his forehead with its tassels,
Slid, with one long sigh of sorrow.
"Take them all, O Hiawatha!"
  From the earth he tore the fibres,
Tore the tough roots of the Larch-tree,
Closely sewed the bark together,
Bound it closely to the frame-work.
  "Give me of your balm, O Fir-tree!
Of your balsam and your resin,
So to close the seams together
That the water may not enter,
That the river may not wet me!"
  And the Fir-tree, tall and sombre,
Sobbed through all its robes of darkness,
Rattled like a shore with pebbles,
Answered wailing, answered weeping,
"Take my balm, O Hiawatha!"
  And he took the tears of balsam,
Took the resin of the Fir-tree,
Smeared therewith each seam and fissure,
Made each crevice safe from water.
  "Give me of your quills, O Hedgehog!
All your quills, O Kagh, the Hedgehog!
I will make a necklace of them,
Make a girdle for my beauty,
And two stars to deck her bosom!"
  From a hollow tree the Hedgehog
With his sleepy eyes looked at him,
Shot his shining quills, like arrows,
Saying with a drowsy murmur,
Through the tangle of his whiskers,
"Take my quills, O Hiawatha!"
  From the ground the quills he gathered,
All the little shining arrows,
Stained them red and blue and yellow,
With the juice of roots and berries;
Into his canoe he wrought them,
Round its waist a shining girdle,
Round its bows a gleaming necklace,
On its breast two stars resplendent.
  Thus the Birch Canoe was builded
In the valley, by the river,
In the bosom of the forest;
And the forest's life was in it,
All its mystery and its magic,
All the lightness of the birch-tree,
All the toughness of the cedar,
All the larch's supple sinews;
And it floated on the river
Like a yellow leaf in Autumn,
Like a yellow water-lily.
  Paddles none had Hiawatha,
Paddles none he had or needed,
For his thoughts as paddles served him,
And his wishes served to guide him;
Swift or slow at will he glided,
Veered to right or left at pleasure.
  Then he called aloud to Kwasind,
To his friend, the strong man, Kwasind,
Saying, "Help me clear this river
Of its sunken logs and sand-bars."
  Straight into the river Kwasind
Plunged as if he were an otter,
Dived as if he were a beaver,
Stood up to his waist in water,
To his arm-pits in the river,
Swam and scouted in the river,
Tugged at sunken logs and branches,
With his hands he scooped the sand-bars,
With his feet the ooze and tangle.
  And thus sailed my Hiawatha
Down the rushing Taquamenaw,
Sailed through all its bends and windings,
Sailed through all its deeps and shallows,
While his friend, the strong man, Kwasind,
Swam the deeps, the shallows waded.
  Up and down the river went they,
In and out among its islands,
Cleared its bed of root and sand-bar,
Dragged the dead trees from its channel,
Made its passage safe and certain,
Made a pathway for the people,
From its springs among the mountains,
To the waters of Pauwating,
To the bay of Taquamenaw.



VIII

HIAWATHA'S FISHING

Forth upon the Gitche Gumee,
On the shining Big-Sea-Water,
With his fishing-line of cedar,
Of the twisted bark of cedar,
Forth to catch the sturgeon Nahma,
Mishe-Nahma, King of Fishes,
In his birch canoe exulting
All alone went Hiawatha.
  Through the clear, transparent water
He could see the fishes swimming
Far down in the depths below him;
See the yellow perch, the Sahwa,
Like a sunbeam in the water,
See the Shawgashee, the craw-fish,
Like a spider on the bottom,
On the white and sandy bottom.
  At the stern sat Hiawatha,
With his fishing-line of cedar;
In his plumes the breeze of morning
Played as in the hemlock branches;
On the bows, with tail erected,
Sat the squirrel, Adjidaumo;
In his fur the breeze of morning
Played as in the prairie grasses.
  On the white sand of the bottom
Lay the monster Mishe-Nahma,
Lay the sturgeon, King of Fishes;
Through his gills he breathed the water,
With his fins he fanned and winnowed,
With his tail he swept the sand-floor.
  There he lay in all his armor;
On each side a shield to guard him,
Plates of bone upon his forehead,
Down his sides and back and shoulders
Plates of bone with spines projecting
Painted was he with his war-paints,
Stripes of yellow, red, and azure,
Spots of brown and spots of sable;
And he lay there on the bottom,
Fanning with his fins of purple,
As above him Hiawatha
In his birch canoe came sailing,
With his fishing-line of cedar.
  "Take my bait," cried Hiawatha,
Down into the depths beneath him,
"Take my bait, O Sturgeon, Nahma!
Come up from below the water,
Let us see which is the stronger!"
And he dropped his line of cedar
Through the clear, transparent water,
Waited vainly for an answer,
Long sat waiting for an answer,
And repeating loud and louder,
"Take my bait, O King of Fishes!"
  Quiet lay the sturgeon, Nahma,
Fanning slowly in the water,
Looking up at Hiawatha,
Listening to his call and clamor,
His unnecessary tumult,
Till he wearied of the shouting;
And he said to the Kenozha,
To the pike, the Maskenozha,
"Take the bait of this rude fellow,
Break the line of Hiawatha!"
  In his fingers Hiawatha
Felt the loose line jerk and tighten;
As he drew it in, it tugged so
That the birch canoe stood endwise,
Like a birch log in the water,
With the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
Perched and frisking on the summit.
Full of scorn was Hiawatha
When he saw the fish rise upward,
Saw the pike, the Maskenozha,
Coming nearer, nearer to him,
And he shouted through the water,
"Esa! esa! shame upon you!
You are but the pike, Kenozha,
You are not the fish I wanted,
You are not the King of Fishes!"
  Reeling downward to the bottom
Sank the pike in great confusion,
And the mighty sturgeon, Nahma,
Said to Ugudwash, the sun-fish,
To the bream, with scales of crimson,
"Take the bait of this great boaster,
Break the line of Hiawatha!"
  Slowly upward, wavering, gleaming,
Rose the Ugudwash, the sun-fish,
Seized the line of Hiawatha,
Swung with all his weight upon it,
Made a whirlpool in the water,
Whirled the birch canoe in circles,
Round and round in gurgling eddies,
Till the circles in the water
Reached the far-off sandy beaches,
Till the water-flags and rushes
Nodded on the distant margins.
  But when Hiawatha saw him
Slowly rising through the water,
Lifting up his disk refulgent,
Loud he shouted in derision,
"Esa! esa! shame upon you!
You are Ugudwash, the sun-fish,
You are not the fish I wanted,
You are not the King of Fishes!"
  Slowly downward, wavering, gleaming,
Sank the Ugudwash, the sun-fish,
And again the sturgeon, Nahma,
Heard the shout of Hiawatha,
Heard his challenge of defiance,
The unnecessary tumult,
Ringing far across the water.
  From the white sand of the bottom
Up he rose with angry gesture,
Quivering in each nerve and fibre,
Clashing all his plates of armor,
Gleaming bright with all his war-paint;
In his wrath he darted upward,
Flashing leaped into the sunshine,
Opened his great jaws, and swallowed
Both canoe and Hiawatha.
  Down into that darksome cavern
Plunged the headlong Hiawatha,
As a log on some black river
Shoots and plunges down the rapids,
Found himself in utter darkness,
Groped about in helpless wonder,
Till he felt a great heart beating,
Throbbing in that utter darkness.
  And he smote it in his anger,
With his fist, the heart of Nahma,
Felt the mighty King of Fishes
Shudder through each nerve and fibre,
Heard the water gurgle round him
As he leaped and staggered through it,
Sick at heart, and faint and weary.
  Crosswise then did Hiawatha
Drag his birch-canoe for safety,
Lest from out the jaws of Nahma,
In the turmoil and confusion,
Forth he might be hurled and perish.
And the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
Frisked and chatted very gayly,
Toiled and tugged with Hiawatha
Till the labor was completed.
  Then said Hiawatha to him,
"O my little friend, the squirrel,
Bravely have you toiled to help me;
Take the thanks of Hiawatha,
And the name which now he gives you;
For hereafter and forever
Boys shall call you Adjidaumo,
Tail-in-air the boys shall call you!"
  And again the sturgeon, Nahma,
Gasped and quivered in the water,
Then was still, and drifted landward
Till he grated on the pebbles,
Till the listening Hiawatha
Heard him grate upon the margin,
Felt him strand upon the pebbles,
Knew that Nahma, King of Fishes,
Lay there dead upon the margin.
  Then he heard a clang and flapping,
As of many wings assembling,
Heard a screaming and confusion,
As of birds of prey contending,
Saw a gleam of light above him,
Shining through the ribs of Nahma,
Saw the glittering eyes of sea-gulls,
Of Kayoshk, the sea-gulls, peering,
Gazing at him through the opening,
Heard them saying to each other,
"'T is our brother, Hiawatha!"
  And he shouted from below them,
Cried exulting from the caverns:
"O ye sea-gulls! O my brothers!
I have slain the sturgeon, Nahma;
Make the rifts a little larger,
With your claws the openings widen,
Set me free from this dark prison,
And henceforward and forever
Men shall speak of your achievements,
Calling you Kayoshk, the sea-gulls,
Yes, Kayoshk, the Noble Scratchers!"
  And the wild and clamorous sea-gulls
Toiled with beak and claws together,
Made the rifts and openings wider
In the mighty ribs of Nahma,
And from peril and from prison,
From the body of the sturgeon,
From the peril of the water,
They released my Hiawatha.
  He was standing near his wigwam,
On the margin of the water,
And he called to old Nokomis,
Called and beckoned to Nokomis,
Pointed to the sturgeon, Nahma,
Lying lifeless on the pebbles,
With the sea-gulls feeding on him.
  "I have slain the Mishe-Nahma,
Slain the King of Fishes!" said he;
"Look! the sea-gulls feed upon him,
Yes, my friends Kayoshk, the sea-gulls;
Drive them not away, Nokomis,
They have saved me from great peril
In the body of the sturgeon,
Wait until their meal is ended,
Till their craws are full with feasting,
Till they homeward fly, at sunset,
To their nests among the marshes;
Then bring all your pots and kettles,
And make oil for us in Winter."
  And she waited till the sun set,
Till the pallid moon, the Night-sun,
Rose above the tranquil water,
Till Kayoshk, the sated sea-gulls,
From their banquet rose with clamor,
And across the fiery sunset
Winged their way to far-off islands,
To their nests among the rushes.
  To his sleep went Hiawatha,
And Nokomis to her labor,
Toiling patient in the moonlight,
Till the sun and moon changed places,
Till the sky was red with sunrise,
And Kayoshk, the hungry sea-gulls,
Came back from the reedy islands,
Clamorous for their morning banquet.
  Three whole days and nights alternate
Old Nokomis and the sea-gulls
Stripped the oily flesh of Nahma,
Till the waves washed through the rib-bones,
Till the sea-gulls came no longer,
And upon the sands lay nothing
But the skeleton of Nahma.



IX

HIAWATHA AND THE PEARL-FEATHER

On the shores of Gitche Gumee,
Of the shining Big-Sea-Water,
Stood Nokomis, the old woman,
Pointing with her finger westward,
O'er the water pointing westward,
To the purple clouds of sunset.
  Fiercely the red sun descending
Burned his way along the heavens,
Set the sky on fire behind him,
As war-parties, when retreating,
Burn the prairies on their war-trail;
And the moon, the Night-sun, eastward,
Suddenly starting from his ambush,
Followed fast those bloody footprints,
Followed in that fiery war-trail,
With its glare upon his features.
  And Nokomis, the old woman,
Pointing with her finger westward,
Spake these words to Hiawatha:
"Yonder dwells the great Pearl-Feather,
Megissogwon, the Magician,
Manito of Wealth and Wampum,
Guarded by his fiery serpents,
Guarded by the black pitch-water.
You can see his fiery serpents,
The Kenabeek, the great serpents,
Coiling, playing in the water;
You can see the black pitch-water
Stretching far away beyond them,
To the purple clouds of sunset!
  "He it was who slew my father,
By his wicked wiles and cunning,
When he from the moon descended,
When he came on earth to seek me.
He, the mightiest of Magicians,
Sends the fever from the marshes,
Sends the pestilential vapors,
Sends the poisonous exhalations,
Sends the white fog from the fen-lands,
Sends disease and death among us!
  "Take your bow, O Hiawatha,
Take your arrows, jasper-headed,
Take your war-club, Puggawaugun,
And your mittens, Minjekahwun,
And your birch-canoe for sailing,
And the oil of Mishe-Nahma,
So to smear its sides, that swiftly
You may pass the black pitch-water;
Slay this merciless magician,
Save the people from the fever
That he breathes across the fen-lands,
And avenge my father's murder!"
  Straightway then my Hiawatha
Armed himself with all his war-gear,
Launched his birch-canoe for sailing;
With his palm its sides he patted,
Said with glee, "Cheemaun, my darling,
O my Birch-canoe! leap forward,
Where you see the fiery serpents,
Where you see the black pitch-water!"
  Forward leaped Cheemaun exulting,
And the noble Hiawatha
Sang his war-song wild and woful,
And above him the war-eagle,
The Keneu, the great war-eagle,
Master of all fowls with feathers,
Screamed and hurtled through the heavens.
  Soon he reached the fiery serpents,
The Kenabeek, the great serpents,
Lying huge upon the water,
Sparkling, rippling in the water,
Lying coiled across the passage,
With their blazing crests uplifted,
Breathing fiery fogs and vapors,
So that none could pass beyond them.
  But the fearless Hiawatha
Cried aloud, and spake in this wise:
"Let me pass my way, Kenabeek,
Let me go upon my journey!"
And they answered, hissing fiercely,
With their fiery breath made answer:
"Back, go back! O Shaugodaya!
Back to old Nokomis, Faint-heart!"
  Then the angry Hiawatha
Raised his mighty bow of ash-tree,
Seized his arrows, jasper-headed,
Shot them fast among the serpents;
Every twanging of the bow-string
Was a war-cry and a death-cry,
Every whizzing of an arrow
Was a death-song of Kenabeek.
  Weltering in the bloody water,
Dead lay all the fiery serpents,
And among them Hiawatha
Harmless sailed, and cried exulting:
"Onward, O Cheemaun, my darling!
Onward to the black pitch-water!"
  Then he took the oil of Nahma,
And the bows and sides anointed,
Smeared them well with oil, that swiftly
He might pass the black pitch-water.
  All night long he sailed upon it,
Sailed upon that sluggish water,
Covered with its mould of ages,
Black with rotting water-rushes,
Rank with flags and leaves of lilies,
Stagnant, lifeless, dreary, dismal,
Lighted by the shimmering moonlight,
And by will-o'-the-wisps illumined,
Fires by ghosts of dead men kindled,
In their weary night-encampments.
  All the air was white with moonlight,
All the water black with shadow,
And around him the Suggema,
The mosquito, sang his war-song,
And the fire-flies, Wah-wah-taysee,
Waved their torches to mislead him;
And the bull-frog, the Dahinda,
Thrust his head into the moonlight,
Fixed his yellow eyes upon him,
Sobbed and sank beneath the surface;
And anon a thousand whistles,
Answered over all the fen-lands,
And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
Far off on the reedy margin,
Heralded the hero's coming.
  Westward thus fared Hiawatha,
Toward the realm of Megissogwon,
Toward the land of the Pearl-Feather,
Till the level moon stared at him,
In his face stared pale and haggard,
Till the sun was hot behind him,
Till it burned upon his shoulders,
And before him on the upland
He could see the Shining Wigwam
Of the Manito of Wampum,
Of the mightiest of Magicians.
  Then once more Cheemaun he patted,
To his birch-canoe said, "Onward!"
And it stirred in all its fibres,
And with one great bound of triumph
Leaped across the water-lilies,
Leaped through tangled flags and rushes,
And upon the beach beyond them
Dry-shod landed Hiawatha.
  Straight he took his bow of ash-tree,
On the sand one end he rested,
With his knee he pressed the middle,
Stretched the faithful bow-string tighter,
Took an arrow, jasper-headed,
Shot it at the Shining Wigwam,
Sent it singing as a herald,
As a bearer of his message,
Of his challenge loud and lofty:
"Come forth from your lodge, Pearl-Feather!
Hiawatha waits your coming!"
  Straightway from the Shining Wigwam
Came the mighty Megissogwon,
Tall of stature, broad of shoulder,
Dark and terrible in aspect,
Clad from head to foot in wampum,
Armed with all his warlike weapons,
Painted like the sky of morning,
Streaked with crimson, blue, and yellow,
Crested with great eagle-feathers,
Streaming upward, streaming outward.
  "Well I know you, Hiawatha!"
Cried he in a voice of thunder,
In a tone of loud derision.
"Hasten back, O Shaugodaya!
Hasten back among the women,
Back to old Nokomis, Faint-heart!
I will slay you as you stand there,
As of old I slew her father!"
  But my Hiawatha answered,
Nothing daunted, fearing nothing:
"Big words do not smite like war-clubs,
Boastful breath is not a bow-string,
Taunts are not so sharp as arrows,
Deeds are better things than words are,
Actions mightier than boastings!"
  Then began the greatest battle
That the sun had ever looked on,
That the war-birds ever witnessed.
All a Summer's day it lasted,
From the sunrise to the sunset;
For the shafts of Hiawatha
Harmless hit the shirt of wampum,
Harmless fell the blows he dealt it
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
Harmless fell the heavy war-club;
It could dash the rocks asunder,
But it could not break the meshes
Of that magic shirt of wampum.
  Till at sunset Hiawatha,
Leaning on his bow of ash-tree,
Wounded, weary, and desponding,
With his mighty war-club broken,
With his mittens torn and tattered,
And three useless arrows only,
Paused to rest beneath a pine-tree,
From whose branches trailed the mosses,
And whose trunk was coated over
With the Dead-man's Moccasin-leather,
With the fungus white and yellow.
  Suddenly from the boughs above him
Sang the Mama, the woodpecker:
"Aim your arrows, Hiawatha,
At the head of Megissogwon,
Strike the tuft of hair upon it,
At their roots the long black tresses;
There alone can he be wounded!"
  Winged with feathers, tipped with jasper,
Swift flew Hiawatha's arrow,
Just as Megissogwon, stooping,
Raised a heavy stone to throw it.
Full upon the crown it struck him,
At the roots of his long tresses,
And he reeled and staggered forward,
Plunging like a wounded bison,
Yes, like Pezhekee, the bison,
When the snow is on the prairie.
  Swifter flew the second arrow,
In the pathway of the other,
Piercing deeper than the other,
Wounding sorer than the other;
And the knees of Megissogwon
Shook like windy reeds beneath him,
Bent and trembled like the rushes.
  But the third and latest arrow
Swiftest flew, and wounded sorest,
And the mighty Megissogwon
Saw the fiery eyes of Pauguk,
Saw the eyes of Death glare at him,
Heard his voice call in the darkness;
At the feet of Hiawatha
Lifeless lay the great Pearl-Feather,
Lay the mightiest of Magicians.
  Then the grateful Hiawatha
Called the Mama, the woodpecker,
From his perch among the branches
Of the melancholy pine-tree,
And, in honor of his service,
Stained with blood the tuft of feathers
On the little head of Mama;
Even to this day he wears it,
Wears the tuft of crimson feathers,
As a symbol of his service.
  Then he stripped the shirt of wampum
From the back of Megissogwon,
As a trophy of the battle,
As a signal of his conquest.
On the shore he left the body,
Half on land and half in water,
In the sand his feet were buried,
And his face was in the water.
And above him, wheeled and clamored
The Keneu, the great war-eagle,
Sailing round in narrower circles,
Hovering nearer, nearer, nearer.
  From the wigwam Hiawatha
Bore the wealth of Megissogwon,
All his wealth of skins and wampum,
Furs of bison and of beaver,
Furs of sable and of ermine,
Wampum belts and strings and pouches,
Quivers wrought with beads of wampum,
Filled with arrows, silver-headed.
  Homeward then he sailed exulting,
Homeward through the black pitch-water,
Homeward through the weltering serpents,
With the trophies of the battle,
With a shout and song of triumph.
  On the shore stood old Nokomis,
On the shore stood Chibiabos,
And the very strong man, Kwasind,
Waiting for the hero's coming,
Listening to his songs of triumph.
And the people of the village
Welcomed him with songs and dances,
Made a joyous feast, and shouted:
"Honor be to Hiawatha!
He has slain the great Pearl-Feather,
Slain the mightiest of Magicians,
Him, who sent the fiery fever,
Sent the white fog from the fen-lands,
Sent disease and death among us!"
  Ever dear to Hiawatha
Was the memory of Mama!
And in token of his friendship,
As a mark of his remembrance,
He adorned and decked his pipe-stem
With the crimson tuft of feathers,
With the blood-red crest of Mama.
But the wealth of Megissogwon,
All the trophies of the battle,
He divided with his people,
Shared it equally among them.



X

HIAWATHA'S WOOING

"As unto the bow the cord is,
So unto the man is woman;
Though she bends him, she obeys him,
Though she draws him, yet she follows,
Useless each without the other!"
  Thus the youthful Hiawatha
Said within himself and pondered,
Much perplexed by various feelings,
Listless, longing, hoping, fearing,
Dreaming still of Minnehaha,
Of the lovely Laughing Water,
In the land of the Dacotahs.
  "Wed a maiden of your people,"
Warning said the old Nokomis;
"Go not eastward, go not westward,
For a stranger, whom we know not!
Like a fire upon the hearth-stone
Is a neighbor's homely daughter,
Like the starlight or the moonlight
Is the handsomest of strangers!"
  Thus dissuading spake Nokomis,
And my Hiawatha answered
Only this: "Dear old Nokomis,
Very pleasant is the firelight,
But I like the starlight better,
Better do I like the moonlight!"
  Gravely then said old Nokomis:
"Bring not here an idle maiden,
Bring not here a useless woman,
Hands unskilful, feet unwilling;
Bring a wife with nimble fingers,
Heart and hand that move together,
Feet that run on willing errands!"
  Smiling answered Hiawatha:
"In the land of the Dacotahs
Lives the Arrow-maker's daughter,
Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
Handsomest of all the women.
I will bring her to your wigwam,
She shall run upon your errands,
Be your starlight, moonlight, firelight,
Be the sunlight of my people!"
  Still dissuading said Nokomis:
"Bring not to my lodge a stranger
From the land of the Dacotahs!
Very fierce are the Dacotahs,
Often is there war between us,
There are feuds yet unforgotten,
Wounds that ache and still may open!"
  Laughing answered Hiawatha:
"For that reason, if no other,
Would I wed the fair Dacotah,
That our tribes might be united,
That old feuds might be forgotten,
And old wounds be healed forever!"
  Thus departed Hiawatha
To the land of the Dacotahs,
To the land of handsome women;
Striding over moor and meadow,
Through interminable forests,
Through uninterrupted silence.
  With his moccasins of magic,
At each stride a mile he measured;
Yet the way seemed long before him,
And his heart outran his footsteps;
And he journeyed without resting,
Till he heard the cataract's laughter,
Heard the Falls of Minnehaha
Calling to him through the silence.
"Pleasant is the sound!" he murmured,
"Pleasant is the voice that calls me!"
  On the outskirts of the forests,
'Twixt the shadow and the sunshine,
Herds of fallow deer were feeding,
But they saw not Hiawatha;
To his bow he whispered, "Fail not!"
To his arrow whispered, "Swerve not!"
Sent it singing on its errand,
To the red heart of the roebuck;
Threw the deer across his shoulder,
And sped forward without pausing.
  At the doorway of his wigwam
Sat the ancient Arrow-maker,
In the land of the Dacotahs,
Making arrow-heads of jasper,
Arrow-heads of chalcedony.
At his side, in all her beauty,
Sat the lovely Minnehaha,
Sat his daughter, Laughing Water,
Plaiting mats of flags and rushes
Of the past the old man's thoughts were,
And the maiden's of the future.
  He was thinking, as he sat there,
Of the days when with such arrows
He had struck the deer and bison,
On the Muskoday, the meadow;
Shot the wild goose, flying southward
On the wing, the clamorous Wawa;
Thinking of the great war-parties,
How they came to buy his arrows,
Could not fight without his arrows.
Ah, no more such noble warriors
Could be found on earth as they were!
Now the men were all like women,
Only used their tongues for weapons!
  She was thinking of a hunter,
From another tribe and country,
Young and tall and very handsome,
Who one morning, in the Spring-time,
Came to buy her father's arrows,
Sat and rested in the wigwam,
Lingered long about the doorway,
Looking back as he departed.
She had heard her father praise him,
Praise his courage and his wisdom;
Would he come again for arrows
To the Falls of Minnehaha?
On the mat her hands lay idle,
And her eyes were very dreamy.
  Through their thoughts they heard a footstep,
Heard a rustling in the branches,
And with glowing cheek and forehead,
With the deer upon his shoulders,
Suddenly from out the woodlands
Hiawatha stood before them.
  Straight the ancient Arrow-maker
Looked up gravely from his labor,
Laid aside the unfinished arrow,
Bade him enter at the doorway,
Saying, as he rose to meet him,
'Hiawatha, you are welcome!"
  At the feet of Laughing Water
Hiawatha laid his burden,
Threw the red deer from his shoulders;
And the maiden looked up at him,
Looked up from her mat of rushes,
Said with gentle look and accent,
"You are welcome, Hiawatha!"
  Very spacious was the wigwam,
Made of deer-skins dressed and whitened,
With the Gods of the Dacotahs
Drawn and painted on its curtains,
And so tall the doorway, hardly
Hiawatha stooped to enter,
Hardly touched his eagle-feathers
As he entered at the doorway.
  Then uprose the Laughing Water,
From the ground fair Minnehaha,
Laid aside her mat unfinished,
Brought forth food and set before them,
Water brought them from the brooklet,
Gave them food in earthen vessels,
Gave them drink in bowls of bass-wood,
Listened while the guest was speaking,
Listened while her father answered,
But not once her lips she opened,
Not a single word she uttered.
  Yes, as in a dream she listened
To the words of Hiawatha,
As he talked of old Nokomis,
Who had nursed him in his childhood,
As he told of his companions,
Chibiabos, the musician,
And the very strong man, Kwasind,
And of happiness and plenty
In the land of the Ojibways,
In the pleasant land and peaceful.
  "After many years of warfare,
Many years of strife and bloodshed,
There is peace between the Ojibways
And the tribe of the Dacotahs."
Thus continued Hiawatha,
And then added, speaking slowly,
"That this peace may last forever,
And our hands be clasped more closely,
And our hearts be more united,
Give me as my wife this maiden,
Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
Loveliest of Dacotah women!"
  And the ancient Arrow-maker
Paused a moment ere he answered,
Smoked a little while in silence,
Looked at Hiawatha proudly,
Fondly looked at Laughing Water,
And made answer very gravely:
"Yes, if Minnehaha wishes;
Let your heart speak, Minnehaha!"
  And the lovely Laughing Water
Seemed more lovely as she stood there,
Neither willing nor reluctant,
As she went to Hiawatha,
Softly took the seat beside him,
While she said, and blushed to say it,
"I will follow you, my husband!"
  This was Hiawatha's wooing!
Thus it was he won the daughter
Of the ancient Arrow-maker,
In the land of the Dacotahs!
  From the wigwam he departed,
Leading with him Laughing Water;
Hand in hand they went together,
Through the woodland and the meadow,
Left the old man standing lonely
At the doorway of his wigwam,
Heard the Falls of Minnehaha
Calling to them from the distance,
Crying to them from afar off,
"Fare thee well, O Minnehaha!"
  And the ancient Arrow-maker
Turned again unto his labor,
Sat down by his sunny doorway,
Murmuring to himself, and saying:
"Thus it is our daughters leave us,
Those we love, and those who love us!
Just when they have learned to help us,
When we are old and lean upon them,
Comes a youth with flaunting feathers,
With his flute of reeds, a stranger
Wanders piping through the village,
Beckons to the fairest maiden,
And she follows where he leads her,
Leaving all things for the stranger!"
  Pleasant was the journey homeward,
Through interminable forests,
Over meadow, over mountain,
Over river, hill, and hollow.
Short it seemed to Hiawatha,
Though they journeyed very slowly,
Though his pace he checked and slackened
To the steps of Laughing Water.
  Over wide and rushing rivers
In his arms he bore the maiden;
Light he thought her as a feather,
As the plume upon his head-gear;
Cleared the tangled pathway for her,
Bent aside the swaying branches,
Made at night a lodge of branches,
And a bed with boughs of hemlock,
And a fire before the doorway
With the dry cones of the pine-tree.
  All the travelling winds went with them,
O'er the meadows, through the forest;
All the stars of night looked at them,
Watched with sleepless eyes their slumber;
From his ambush in the oak-tree
Peeped the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
Watched with eager eyes the lovers;
And the rabbit, the Wabasso,
Scampered from the path before them,
Peering, peeping from his burrow,
Sat erect upon his haunches,
Watched with curious eyes the lovers.
  Pleasant was the journey homeward!
All the birds sang loud and sweetly
Songs of happiness and heart's-ease;
Sang the bluebird, the Owaissa,
"Happy are you, Hiawatha,
Having such a wife to love you!"
Sang the robin, the Opechee,
"Happy are you, Laughing Water,
Having such a noble husband!"
  From the sky the sun benignant
Looked upon them through the branches,
Saying to them, "O my children,
Love is sunshine, hate is shadow,
Life is checkered shade and sunshine,
Rule by love, O Hiawatha!"
  From the sky the moon looked at them,
Filled the lodge with mystic splendors,
Whispered to them, "O my children,
Day is restless, night is quiet,
Man imperious, woman feeble;
Half is mine, although I follow;
Rule by patience, Laughing Water!"
  Thus it was they journeyed homeward;
Thus it was that Hiawatha
To the lodge of old Nokomis
Brought the moonlight, starlight, firelight,
Brought the sunshine of his people,
Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
Handsomest of all the women
In the land of the Dacotahs,
In the land of handsome women.


XI

HIAWATHA'S WEDDING-FEAST

You shall hear how Pau-Puk-Keewis,
How the handsome Yenadizze
Danced at Hiawatha's wedding;
How the gentle Chibiabos,
He the sweetest of musicians,
Sang his songs of love and longing;
How Iagoo, the great boaster,
He the marvellous story-teller,
Told his tales of strange adventure,
That the feast might be more joyous,
That the time might pass more gayly,
And the guests be more contented.
  Sumptuous was the feast Nokomis
Made at Hiawatha's wedding;
All the bowls were made of bass-wood,
White and polished very smoothly,
All the spoons of horn of bison,
Black and polished very smoothly.
  She had sent through all the village
Messengers with wands of willow,
As a sign of invitation,
As a token of the feasting;
And the wedding guests assembled,
Clad in all their richest raiment,
Robes of fur and belts of wampum,
Splendid with their paint and plumage,
Beautiful with beads and tassels.
  First they ate the sturgeon, Nahma,
And the pike, the Maskenozha,
Caught and cooked by old Nokomis;
Then on pemican they feasted,
Pemican and buffalo marrow,
Haunch of deer and hump of bison,
Yellow cakes of the Mondamin,
And the wild rice of the river.
  But the gracious Hiawatha,
And the lovely Laughing Water,
And the careful old Nokomis,
Tasted not the food before them,
Only waited on the others
Only served their guests in silence.
  And when all the guests had finished,
Old Nokomis, brisk and busy,
From an ample pouch of otter,
Filled the red-stone pipes for smoking
With tobacco from the South-land,
Mixed with bark of the red willow,
And with herbs and leaves of fragrance.
  Then she said, "O Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Dance for us your merry dances,
Dance the Beggar's Dance to please us,
That the feast may be more joyous,
That the time may pass more gayly,
And our guests be more contented!"
  Then the handsome Pau-Puk-Keewis,
He the idle Yenadizze,
He the merry mischief-maker,
Whom the people called the Storm-Fool,
Rose among the guests assembled.
  Skilled was he in sports and pastimes,
In the merry dance of snow-shoes,
In the play of quoits and ball-play;
Skilled was he in games of hazard,
In all games of skill and hazard,
Pugasaing, the Bowl and Counters,
Kuntassoo, the Game of Plum-stones.
  Though the warriors called him Faint-Heart,
Called him coward, Shaugodaya,
Idler, gambler, Yenadizze,
Little heeded he their jesting,
Little cared he for their insults,
For the women and the maidens
Loved the handsome Pau-Puk-Keewis.
  He was dressed in shirt of doeskin,
White and soft, and fringed with ermine,
All inwrought with beads of wampum;
He was dressed in deer-skin leggings,
Fringed with hedgehog quills and ermine,
And in moccasins of buck-skin,
Thick with quills and beads embroidered.
On his head were plumes of swan's down,
On his heels were tails of foxes,
In one hand a fan of feathers,
And a pipe was in the other.
  Barred with streaks of red and yellow,
Streaks of blue and bright vermilion,
Shone the face of Pau-Puk-Keewis.
From his forehead fell his tresses,
Smooth, and parted like a woman's,
Shining bright with oil, and plaited,
Hung with braids of scented grasses,
As among the guests assembled,
To the sound of flutes and singing,
To the sound of drums and voices,
Rose the handsome Pau-Puk-Keewis,
And began his mystic dances.
  First he danced a solemn measure,
Very slow in step and gesture,
In and out among the pine-trees,
Through the shadows and the sunshine,
Treading softly like a panther.
Then more swiftly and still swifter,
Whirling, spinning round in circles,
Leaping o'er the guests assembled,
Eddying round and round the wigwam,
Till the leaves went whirling with him,
Till the dust and wind together
Swept in eddies round about him.
  Then along the sandy margin
Of the lake, the Big-Sea-Water,
On he sped with frenzied gestures,
Stamped upon the sand, and tossed it
Wildly in the air around him;
Till the wind became a whirlwind,
Till the sand was blown and sifted
Like great snowdrifts o'er the landscape,
Heaping all the shores with Sand Dunes,
Sand Hills of the Nagow Wudjoo!
  Thus the merry Pau-Puk-Keewis
Danced his Beggar's Dance to please them,
And, returning, sat down laughing
There among the guests assembled,
Sat and fanned himself serenely
With his fan of turkey-feathers.
  Then they said to Chibiabos,
To the friend of Hiawatha,
To the sweetest of all singers,
To the best of all musicians,
"Sing to us, O Chibiabos!
Songs of love and songs of longing,
That the feast may be more joyous,
That the time may pass more gayly,
And our guests be more contented!"
  And the gentle Chibiabos
Sang in accents sweet and tender,
Sang in tones of deep emotion,
Songs of love and songs of longing;
Looking still at Hiawatha,
Looking at fair Laughing Water,
Sang he softly, sang in this wise:
  "Onaway!  Awake, beloved!
Thou the wild-flower of the forest!
Thou the wild-bird of the prairie!
Thou with eyes so soft and fawn-like!
  "If thou only lookest at me,
I am happy, I am happy,
As the lilies of the prairie,
When they feel the dew upon them!
  "Sweet thy breath is as the fragrance
Of the wild-flowers in the morning,
As their fragrance is at evening,
In the Moon when leaves are falling.
  "Does not all the blood within me
Leap to meet thee, leap to meet thee,
As the springs to meet the sunshine,
In the Moon when nights are brightest?
  "Onaway! my heart sings to thee,
Sings with joy when thou art near me,
As the sighing, singing branches
In the pleasant Moon of Strawberries!
  "When thou art not pleased, beloved,
Then my heart is sad and darkened,
As the shining river darkens
When the clouds drop shadows on it!
  "When thou smilest, my beloved,
Then my troubled heart is brightened,
As in sunshine gleam the ripples
That the cold wind makes in rivers.
  "Smiles the earth, and smile the waters,
Smile the cloudless skies above us,
But I lose the way of smiling
When thou art no longer near me!
  "I myself, myself! behold me!
Blood of my beating heart, behold me!
Oh awake, awake, beloved!
Onaway! awake, beloved!"
  Thus the gentle Chibiabos
Sang his song of love and longing;
And Iagoo, the great boaster,
He the marvellous story-teller,
He the friend of old Nokomis,
Jealous of the sweet musician,
Jealous of the applause they gave him,
Saw in all the eyes around him,
Saw in all their looks and gestures,
That the wedding guests assembled
Longed to hear his pleasant stories,
His immeasurable falsehoods.
  Very boastful was Iagoo;
Never heard he an adventure
But himself had met a greater;
Never any deed of daring
But himself had done a bolder;
Never any marvellous story
But himself could tell a stranger.
  Would you listen to his boasting,
Would you only give him credence,
No one ever shot an arrow
Half so far and high as he had;
Ever caught so many fishes,
Ever killed so many reindeer,
Ever trapped so many beaver!
  None could run so fast as he could,
None could dive so deep as he could,
None could swim so far as he could;
None had made so many journeys,
None had seen so many wonders,
As this wonderful Iagoo,
As this marvellous story-teller!
  Thus his name became a by-word
And a jest among the people;
And whene'er a boastful hunter
Praised his own address too highly,
Or a warrior, home returning,
Talked too much of his achievements,
All his hearers cried, "Iagoo!
Here's Iagoo come among us!"
  He it was who carved the cradle
Of the little Hiawatha,
Carved its framework out of linden,
Bound it strong with reindeer sinews;
He it was who taught him later
How to make his bows and arrows,
How to make the bows of ash-tree,
And the arrows of the oak-tree.
So among the guests assembled
At my Hiawatha's wedding
Sat Iagoo, old and ugly,
Sat the marvellous story-teller.
  And they said, "O good Iagoo,
Tell us now a tale of wonder,
Tell us of some strange adventure,
That the feast may be more joyous,
That the time may pass more gayly,
And our guests be more contented!"
  And Iagoo answered straightway,
"You shall hear a tale of wonder,
You shall hear the strange adventures
Of Osseo, the Magician,
From the Evening Star descending."



XII

THE SON OF THE EVENING STAR

Can it be the sun descending
O'er the level plain of water?
Or the Red Swan floating, flying,
Wounded by the magic arrow,
Staining all the waves with crimson,
With the crimson of its life-blood,
Filling all the air with splendor,
With the splendor of its plumage?
  Yes; it is the sun descending,
Sinking down into the water;
All the sky is stained with purple,
All the water flushed with crimson!
No; it is the Red Swan floating,
Diving down beneath the water;
To the sky its wings are lifted,
With its blood the waves are reddened!
  Over it the Star of Evening
Melts and trembles through the purple,
Hangs suspended in the twilight.
No; it is a bead of wampum
On the robes of the Great Spirit
As he passes through the twilight,
Walks in silence through the heavens.
  This with joy beheld Iagoo
And he said in haste: "Behold it!
See the sacred Star of Evening!
You shall hear a tale of wonder,
Hear the story of Osseo,
Son of the Evening Star, Osseo!
  "Once, in days no more remembered,
Ages nearer the beginning,
When the heavens were closer to us,
And the Gods were more familiar,
In the North-land lived a hunter,
With ten young and comely daughters,
Tall and lithe as wands of willow;
Only Oweenee, the youngest,
She the wilful and the wayward,
She the silent, dreamy maiden,
Was the fairest of the sisters.
  "All these women married warriors,
Married brave and haughty husbands;
Only Oweenee, the youngest,
Laughed and flouted all her lovers,
All her young and handsome suitors,
And then married old Osseo,
Old Osseo, poor and ugly,
Broken with age and weak with coughing,
Always coughing like a squirrel.
  "Ah, but beautiful within him
Was the spirit of Osseo,
From the Evening Star descended,
Star of Evening, Star of Woman,
Star of tenderness and passion!
All its fire was in his bosom,
All its beauty in his spirit,
All its mystery in his being,
All its splendor in his language!
  "And her lovers, the rejected,
Handsome men with belts of wampum,
Handsome men with paint and feathers.
Pointed at her in derision,
Followed her with jest and laughter.
But she said: 'I care not for you,
Care not for your belts of wampum,
Care not for your paint and feathers,
Care not for your jests and laughter;
I am happy with Osseo!'
  "Once to some great feast invited,
Through the damp and dusk of evening,
Walked together the ten sisters,
Walked together with their husbands;
Slowly followed old Osseo,
With fair Oweenee beside him;
All the others chatted gayly,
These two only walked in silence.
  "At the western sky Osseo
Gazed intent, as if imploring,
Often stopped and gazed imploring
At the trembling Star of Evening,
At the tender Star of Woman;
And they heard him murmur softly,
'Ah, showain nemeshin, Nosa!
Pity, pity me, my father!'
  "'Listen!' said the eldest sister,
'He is praying to his father!
What a pity that the old man
Does not stumble in the pathway,
Does not break his neck by falling!'
And they laughed till all the forest
Rang with their unseemly laughter.
  "On their pathway through the woodlands
Lay an oak, by storms uprooted,
Lay the great trunk of an oak-tree,
Buried half in leaves and mosses,
Mouldering, crumbling, huge and hollow.
And Osseo, when he saw it,
Gave a shout, a cry of anguish,
Leaped into its yawning cavern,
At one end went in an old man,
Wasted, wrinkled, old, and ugly;
From the other came a young man,
Tall and straight and strong and handsome.
  "Thus Osseo was transfigured,
Thus restored to youth and beauty;
But, alas for good Osseo,
And for Oweenee, the faithful!
Strangely, too, was she transfigured.
Changed into a weak old woman,
With a staff she tottered onward,
Wasted, wrinkled, old, and ugly!
And the sisters and their husbands
Laughed until the echoing forest
Rang with their unseemly laughter.
  "But Osseo turned not from her,
Walked with slower step beside her,
Took her hand, as brown and withered
As an oak-leaf is in Winter,
Called her sweetheart, Nenemoosha,
Soothed her with soft words of kindness,
Till they reached the lodge of feasting,
Till they sat down in the wigwam,
Sacred to the Star of Evening,
To the tender Star of Woman.
  "Wrapt in visions, lost in dreaming,
At the banquet sat Osseo;
All were merry, all were happy,
All were joyous but Osseo.
Neither food nor drink he tasted,
Neither did he speak nor listen;
But as one bewildered sat he,
Looking dreamily and sadly,
First at Oweenee, then upward
At the gleaming sky above them.
  "Then a voice was heard, a whisper,
Coming from the starry distance,
Coming from the empty vastness,
Low, and musical, and tender;
And the voice said: 'O Osseo!
O my son, my best beloved!
Broken are the spells that bound you,
All the charms of the magicians,
All the magic powers of evil;
Come to me; ascend, Osseo!
  "'Taste the food that stands before you:
It is blessed and enchanted,
It has magic virtues in it,
It will change you to a spirit.
All your bowls and all your kettles
Shall be wood and clay no longer;
But the bowls be changed to wampum,
And the kettles shall be silver;
They shall shine like shells of scarlet,
Like the fire shall gleam and glimmer.
  "'And the women shall no longer
Bear the dreary doom of labor,
But be changed to birds, and glisten
With the beauty of the starlight,
Painted with the dusky splendors
Of the skies and clouds of evening!'
  "What Osseo heard as whispers,
What as words he comprehended,
Was but music to the others,
Music as of birds afar off,
Of the whippoorwill afar off,
Of the lonely Wawonaissa
Singing in the darksome forest.
  "Then the lodge began to tremble,
Straight began to shake and tremble,
And they felt it rising, rising,
Slowly through the air ascending,
From the darkness of the tree-tops
Forth into the dewy starlight,
Till it passed the topmost branches;
And behold! the wooden dishes
All were changed to shells of scarlet!
And behold! the earthen kettles
All were changed to bowls of silver!
And the roof-poles of the wigwam
Were as glittering rods of silver,
And the roof of bark upon them
As the shining shards of beetles.
  "Then Osseo gazed around him,
And he saw the nine fair sisters,
All the sisters and their husbands,
Changed to birds of various plumage.
Some were jays and some were magpies,
Others thrushes, others blackbirds;
And they hopped, and sang, and twittered,
Perked and fluttered all their feathers,
Strutted in their shining plumage,
And their tails like fans unfolded.
  "Only Oweenee, the youngest,
Was not changed, but sat in silence,
Wasted, wrinkled, old, and ugly,
Looking sadly at the others;
Till Osseo, gazing upward,
Gave another cry of anguish,
Such a cry as he had uttered
By the oak-tree in the forest.
  "Then returned her youth and beauty,
And her soiled and tattered garments
Were transformed to robes of ermine,
And her staff became a feather,
Yes, a shining silver feather!
  "And again the wigwam trembled,
Swayed and rushed through airy currents,
Through transparent cloud and vapor,
And amid celestial splendors
On the Evening Star alighted,
As a snow-flake falls on snow-flake,
As a leaf drops on a river,
As the thistledown on water.
  "Forth with cheerful words of welcome
Came the father of Osseo,
He with radiant locks of silver,
He with eyes serene and tender.
And he said: 'My son, Osseo,
Hang the cage of birds you bring there,
Hang the cage with rods of silver,
And the birds with glistening feathers,
At the doorway of my wigwam.'
  "At the door he hung the bird-cage,
And they entered in and gladly
Listened to Osseo's father,
Ruler of the Star of Evening,
As he said: 'O my Osseo!
I have had compassion on you,
Given you back your youth and beauty,
Into birds of various plumage
Changed your sisters and their husbands;
Changed them thus because they mocked you
In the figure of the old man,
In that aspect sad and wrinkled,
Could not see your heart of passion,
Could not see your youth immortal;
Only Oweenee, the faithful,
Saw your naked heart and loved you.
  "'In the lodge that glimmers yonder,
In the little star that twinkles
Through the vapors, on the left hand,
Lives the envious Evil Spirit,
The Wabeno, the magician,
Who transformed you to an old man.
Take heed lest his beams fall on you,
For the rays he darts around him
Are the power of his enchantment,
Are the arrows that he uses.'
  "Many years, in peace and quiet,
On the peaceful Star of Evening
Dwelt Osseo with his father;
Many years, in song and flutter,
At the doorway of the wigwam,
Hung the cage with rods of silver,
And fair Oweenee, the faithful,
Bore a son unto Osseo,
With the beauty of his mother,
With the courage of his father.
  "And the boy grew up and prospered,
And Osseo, to delight him,
Made him little bows and arrows,
Opened the great cage of silver,
And let loose his aunts and uncles,
All those birds with glossy feathers,
For his little son to shoot at.
  "Round and round they wheeled and darted,
Filled the Evening Star with music,
With their songs of joy and freedom
Filled the Evening Star with splendor,
With the fluttering of their plumage;
Till the boy, the little hunter,
Bent his bow and shot an arrow,
Shot a swift and fatal arrow,
And a bird, with shining feathers,
At his feet fell wounded sorely.
  "But, O wondrous transformation!
'T was no bird he saw before him,
'T was a beautiful young woman,
With the arrow in her bosom!
  "When her blood fell on the planet,
On the sacred Star of Evening,
Broken was the spell of magic,
Powerless was the strange enchantment,
And the youth, the fearless bowman,
Suddenly felt himself descending,
Held by unseen hands, but sinking
Downward through the empty spaces,
Downward through the clouds and vapors,
Till he rested on an island,
On an island, green and grassy,
Yonder in the Big-Sea-Water.
  "After him he saw descending
All the birds with shining feathers,
Fluttering, falling, wafted downward,
Like the painted leaves of Autumn;
And the lodge with poles of silver,
With its roof like wings of beetles,
Like the shining shards of beetles,
By the winds of heaven uplifted,
Slowly sank upon the island,
Bringing back the good Osseo,
Bringing Oweenee, the faithful.
  "Then the birds, again transfigured,
Reassumed the shape of mortals,
Took their shape, but not their stature;
They remained as Little People,
Like the pygmies, the Puk-Wudjies,
And on pleasant nights of Summer,
When the Evening Star was shining,
Hand in hand they danced together
On the island's craggy headlands,
On the sand-beach low and level.
  "Still their glittering lodge is seen there,
On the tranquil Summer evenings,
And upon the shore the fisher
Sometimes hears their happy voices,
Sees them dancing in the starlight!"
  When the story was completed,
When the wondrous tale was ended,
Looking round upon his listeners,
Solemnly Iagoo added:
"There are great men, I have known such,
Whom their people understand not,
Whom they even make a jest of,
Scoff and jeer at in derision.
From the story of Osseo
Let us learn the fate of jesters!"
  All the wedding guests delighted
Listened to the marvellous story,
Listened laughing and applauding,
And they whispered to each other:
"Does he mean himself, I wonder?
And are we the aunts and uncles?"
  Then again sang Chibiabos,
Sang a song of love and longing,
In those accents sweet and tender,
In those tones of pensive sadness,
Sang a maiden's lamentation
For her lover, her Algonquin.
  "When I think of my beloved,
Ah me! think of my beloved,
When my heart is thinking of him,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
  "Ah me! when I parted from him,
Round my neck he hung the wampum,
As a pledge, the snow-white wampum,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
  "I will go with you, he whispered,
Ah me! to your native country;
Let me go with you, he whispered,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
 "Far away, away, I answered,
Very far away, I answered,
Ah me! is my native country,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
  "When I looked back to behold him,
Where we parted, to behold him,
After me he still was gazing,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
  "By the tree he still was standing,
By the fallen tree was standing,
That had dropped into the water,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!
  "When I think of my beloved,
Ah me! think of my beloved,
When my heart is thinking of him,
O my sweetheart, my Algonquin!"
  Such was Hiawatha's Wedding,
Such the dance of Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Such the story of Iagoo,
Such the songs of Chibiabos;
Thus the wedding banquet ended,
And the wedding guests departed,
Leaving Hiawatha happy
With the night and Minnehaha.



XIII

BLESSING THE CORNFIELDS

Sing, O Song of Hiawatha,
Of the happy days that followed,
In the land of the Ojibways,
In the pleasant land and peaceful!
Sing the mysteries of Mondamin,
Sing the Blessing of the Cornfields!
  Buried was the bloody hatchet,
Buried was the dreadful war-club,
Buried were all warlike weapons,
And the war-cry was forgotten.
There was peace among the nations;
Unmolested roved the hunters,
Built the birch canoe for sailing,
Caught the fish in lake and river,
Shot the deer and trapped the beaver;
Unmolested worked the women,
Made their sugar from the maple,
Gathered wild rice in the meadows,
Dressed the skins of deer and beaver.
  All around the happy village
Stood the maize-fields, green and shining,
Waved the green plumes of Mondamin,
Waved his soft and sunny tresses,
Filling all the land with plenty.
'T was the women who in Spring-time
Planted the broad fields and fruitful,
Buried in the earth Mondamin;
'T was the women who in Autumn
Stripped the yellow husks of harvest,
Stripped the garments from Mondamin,
Even as Hiawatha taught them.
  Once, when all the maize was planted,
Hiawatha, wise and thoughtful,
Spake and said to Minnehaha,
To his wife, the Laughing Water:
"You shall bless to-night the cornfields,
Draw a magic circle round them,
To protect them from destruction,
Blast of mildew, blight of insect,
Wagemin, the thief of cornfields,
Paimosaid, who steals the maize-ear!
  "In the night, when all is silence,
In the night, when all is darkness,
When the Spirit of Sleep, Nepahwin,
Shuts the doors of all the wigwams,
So that not an ear can hear you,
So that not an eye can see you,
Rise up from your bed in silence,
Lay aside your garments wholly,
Walk around the fields you planted,
Round the borders of the cornfields,
Covered by your tresses only,
Robed with darkness as a garment.
  "Thus the fields shall be more fruitful,
And the passing of your footsteps
Draw a magic circle round them,
So that neither blight nor mildew,
Neither burrowing worm nor insect,
Shall pass o'er the magic circle;
Not the dragon-fly, Kwo-ne-she,
Nor the spider, Subbekashe,
Nor the grasshopper, Pah-puk-keena;
Nor the mighty caterpillar,
Way-muk-kwana, with the bear-skin,
King of all the caterpillars!"
  On the tree-tops near the cornfields
Sat the hungry crows and ravens,
Kahgahgee, the King of Ravens,
With his band of black marauders.
And they laughed at Hiawatha,
Till the tree-tops shook with laughter,
With their melancholy laughter,
At the words of Hiawatha.
"Hear him!" said they; "hear the Wise Man,
Hear the plots of Hiawatha!"
  When the noiseless night descended
Broad and dark o'er field and forest,
When the mournful Wawonaissa
Sorrowing sang among the hemlocks,
And the Spirit of Sleep, Nepahwin,
Shut the doors of all the wigwams,
From her bed rose Laughing Water,
Laid aside her garments wholly,
And with darkness clothed and guarded,
Unashamed and unaffrighted,
Walked securely round the cornfields,
Drew the sacred, magic circle
Of her footprints round the cornfields.
  No one but the Midnight only
Saw her beauty in the darkness,
No one but the Wawonaissa
Heard the panting of her bosom;
Guskewau, the darkness, wrapped her
Closely in his sacred mantle,
So that none might see her beauty,
So that none might boast, "I saw her!"
  On the morrow, as the day dawned,
Kahgahgee, the King of Ravens,
Gathered all his black marauders,
Crows and blackbirds, jays and ravens,
Clamorous on the dusky tree-tops,
And descended, fast and fearless,
On the fields of Hiawatha,
On the grave of the Mondamin.
  "We will drag Mondamin," said they,
"From the grave where he is buried,
Spite of all the magic circles
Laughing Water draws around it,
Spite of all the sacred footprints
Minnehaha stamps upon it!"
  But the wary Hiawatha,
Ever thoughtful, careful, watchful,
Had o'erheard the scornful laughter
When they mocked him from the tree-tops.
"Kaw!" he said, "my friends the ravens!
Kahgahgee, my King of Ravens!
I will teach you all a lesson
That shall not be soon forgotten!"
  He had risen before the daybreak,
He had spread o'er all the cornfields
Snares to catch the black marauders,
And was lying now in ambush
In the neighboring grove of pine-trees,
Waiting for the crows and blackbirds,
Waiting for the jays and ravens.
  Soon they came with caw and clamor,
Rush of wings and cry of voices,
To their work of devastation,
Settling down upon the cornfields,
Delving deep with beak and talon,
For the body of Mondamin.
And with all their craft and cunning,
All their skill in wiles of warfare,
They perceived no danger near them,
Till their claws became entangled,
Till they found themselves imprisoned
In the snares of Hiawatha.
  From his place of ambush came he,
Striding terrible among them,
And so awful was his aspect
That the bravest quailed with terror.
Without mercy he destroyed them
Right and left, by tens and twenties,
And their wretched, lifeless bodies
Hung aloft on poles for scarecrows
Round the consecrated cornfields,
As a signal of his vengeance,
As a warning to marauders.
  Only Kahgahgee, the leader,
Kahgahgee, the King of Ravens,
He alone was spared among them
As a hostage for his people.
With his prisoner-string he bound him,
Led him captive to his wigwam,
Tied him fast with cords of elm-bark
To the ridge-pole of his wigwam.
  "Kahgahgee, my raven!" said he,
"You the leader of the robbers,
You the plotter of this mischief,
The contriver of this outrage,
I will keep you, I will hold you,
As a hostage for your people,
As a pledge of good behavior!"
  And he left him, grim and sulky,
Sitting in the morning sunshine
On the summit of the wigwam,
Croaking fiercely his displeasure,
Flapping his great sable pinions,
Vainly struggling for his freedom,
Vainly calling on his people!
  Summer passed, and Shawondasee
Breathed his sighs o'er all the landscape,
From the South-land sent his ardor,
Wafted kisses warm and tender;
And the maize-field grew and ripened,
Till it stood in all the splendor
Of its garments green and yellow,
Of its tassels and its plumage,
And the maize-ears full and shining
Gleamed from bursting sheaths of verdure.
  Then Nokomis, the old woman,
Spake, and said to Minnehaha:
"'T is the Moon when leaves are falling;
All the wild-rice has been gathered,
And the maize is ripe and ready;
Let us gather in the harvest,
Let us wrestle with Mondamin,
Strip him of his plumes and tassels,
Of his garments green and yellow!"
  And the merry Laughing Water
Went rejoicing from the wigwam,
With Nokomis, old and wrinkled,
And they called the women round them,
Called the young men and the maidens,
To the harvest of the cornfields,
To the husking of the maize-ear.
  On the border of the forest,
Underneath the fragrant pine-trees,
Sat the old men and the warriors
Smoking in the pleasant shadow.
In uninterrupted silence
Looked they at the gamesome labor
Of the young men and the women;
Listened to their noisy talking,
To their laughter and their singing,
Heard them chattering like the magpies,
Heard them laughing like the blue-jays,
Heard them singing like the robins.
  And whene'er some lucky maiden
Found a red ear in the husking,
Found a maize-ear red as blood is,
"Nushka!" cried they all together,
"Nushka! you shall have a sweetheart,
You shall have a handsome husband!"
"Ugh!" the old men all responded
From their seats beneath the pine-trees.
  And whene'er a youth or maiden
Found a crooked ear in husking,
Found a maize-ear in the husking
Blighted, mildewed, or misshapen,
Then they laughed and sang together,
Crept and limped about the cornfields,
Mimicked in their gait and gestures
Some old man, bent almost double,
Singing singly or together:
"Wagemin, the thief of cornfields!
Paimosaid, who steals the maize-ear!"
  Till the cornfields rang with laughter,
Till from Hiawatha's wigwam
Kahgahgee, the King of Ravens,
Screamed and quivered in his anger,
And from all the neighboring tree-tops
Cawed and croaked the black marauders.
"Ugh!" the old men all responded,
From their seats beneath the pine-trees!



XIV

PICTURE-WRITING

In those days said Hiawatha,
"Lo! how all things fade and perish!
From the memory of the old men
Pass away the great traditions,
The achievements of the warriors,
The adventures of the hunters,
All the wisdom of the Medas,
All the craft of the Wabenos,
All the marvellous dreams and visions
Of the Jossakeeds, the Prophets!
  "Great men die and are forgotten,
Wise men speak; their words of wisdom
Perish in the ears that hear them,
Do not reach the generations
That, as yet unborn, are waiting
In the great, mysterious darkness
Of the speechless days that shall be!
  "On the grave-posts of our fathers
Are no signs, no figures painted;
Who are in those graves we know not,
Only know they are our fathers.
Of what kith they are and kindred,
From what old, ancestral Totem,
Be it Eagle, Bear, or Beaver,
They descended, this we know not,
Only know they are our fathers.
  "Face to face we speak together,
But we cannot speak when absent,
Cannot send our voices from us
To the friends that dwell afar off;
Cannot send a secret message,
But the bearer learns our secret,
May pervert it, may betray it,
May reveal it unto others."
  Thus said Hiawatha, walking
In the solitary forest,
Pondering, musing in the forest,
On the welfare of his people.
  From his pouch he took his colors,
Took his paints of different colors,
On the smooth bark of a birch-tree
Painted many shapes and figures,
Wonderful and mystic figures,
And each figure had a meaning,
Each some word or thought suggested.
  Gitche Manito the Mighty,
He, the Master of Life, was painted
As an egg, with points projecting
To the four winds of the heavens.
Everywhere is the Great Spirit,
Was the meaning of this symbol.
  Mitche Manito the Mighty,
He the dreadful Spirit of Evil,
As a serpent was depicted,
As Kenabeek, the great serpent.
Very crafty, very cunning,
Is the creeping Spirit of Evil,
Was the meaning of this symbol.
  Life and Death he drew as circles,
Life was white, but Death was darkened;
Sun and moon and stars he painted,
Man and beast, and fish and reptile,
Forests, mountains, lakes, and rivers.
  For the earth he drew a straight line,
For the sky a bow above it;
White the space between for daytime,
Filled with little stars for night-time;
On the left a point for sunrise,
On the right a point for sunset,
On the top a point for noontide,
And for rain and cloudy weather
Waving lines descending from it.
  Footprints pointing towards a wigwam
Were a sign of invitation,
Were a sign of guests assembling;
Bloody hands with palms uplifted
Were a symbol of destruction,
Were a hostile sign and symbol.
  All these things did Hiawatha
Show unto his wondering people,
And interpreted their meaning,
And he said: "Behold, your grave-posts
Have no mark, no sign, nor symbol,
Go and paint them all with figures;
Each one with its household symbol,
With its own ancestral Totem;
So that those who follow after
May distinguish them and know them."
  And they painted on the grave-posts
On the graves yet unforgotten,
Each his own ancestral Totem,
Each the symbol of his household;
Figures of the Bear and Reindeer,
Of the Turtle, Crane, and Beaver,
Each inverted as a token
That the owner was departed,
That the chief who bore the symbol
Lay beneath in dust and ashes.
  And the Jossakeeds, the Prophets,
The Wabenos, the Magicians,
And the Medicine-men, the Medas,
Painted upon bark and deer-skin
Figures for the songs they chanted,
For each song a separate symbol,
Figures mystical and awful,
Figures strange and brightly colored;
And each figure had its meaning,
Each some magic song suggested.
  The Great Spirit, the Creator,
Flashing light through all the heaven;
The Great Serpent, the Kenabeek,
With his bloody crest erected,
Creeping, looking into heaven;
In the sky the sun, that listens,
And the moon eclipsed and dying;
Owl and eagle, crane and hen-hawk,
And the cormorant, bird of magic;
Headless men, that walk the heavens,
Bodies lying pierced with arrows,
Bloody hands of death uplifted,
Flags on graves, and great war-captains
Grasping both the earth and heaven!
  Such as these the shapes they painted
On the birch-bark and the deer-skin;
Songs of war and songs of hunting,
Songs of medicine and of magic,
All were written in these figures,
For each figure had its meaning,
Each its separate song recorded.
  Nor forgotten was the Love-Song,
The most subtle of all medicines,
The most potent spell of magic,
Dangerous more than war or hunting!
Thus the Love-Song was recorded,
Symbol and interpretation.
  First a human figure standing,
Painted in the brightest scarlet;
'T is the lover, the musician,
And the meaning is, "My painting
Makes me powerful over others."
  Then the figure seated, singing,
Playing on a drum of magic,
And the interpretation, "Listen!
'T is my voice you hear, my singing!"
  Then the same red figure seated
In the shelter of a wigwam,
And the meaning of the symbol,
"I will come and sit beside you
In the mystery of my passion!"
  Then two figures, man and woman,
Standing hand in hand together
With their hands so clasped together
That they seemed in one united,
And the words thus represented
Are, "I see your heart within you,
And your cheeks are red with blushes!"
  Next the maiden on an island,
In the centre of an island;
And the song this shape suggested
Was, "Though you were at a distance,
Were upon some far-off island,
Such the spell I cast upon you,
Such the magic power of passion,
I could straightway draw you to me!"
  Then the figure of the maiden
Sleeping, and the lover near her,
Whispering to her in her slumbers,
Saying, "Though you were far from me
In the land of Sleep and Silence,
Still the voice of love would reach you!"
  And the last of all the figures
Was a heart within a circle,
Drawn within a magic circle;
And the image had this meaning:
"Naked lies your heart before me,
To your naked heart I whisper!"
  Thus it was that Hiawatha,
In his wisdom, taught the people
All the mysteries of painting,
All the art of Picture-Writing,
On the smooth bark of the birch-tree,
On the white skin of the reindeer,
On the grave-posts of the village.



XV

HIAWATHA'S LAMENTATION

In those days the Evil Spirits,
All the Manitos of mischief,
Fearing Hiawatha's wisdom,
And his love for Chibiabos,
Jealous of their faithful friendship,
And their noble words and actions,
Made at length a league against them,
To molest them and destroy them.
  Hiawatha, wise and wary,
Often said to Chibiabos,
"O my brother! do not leave me,
Lest the Evil Spirits harm you!"
Chibiabos, young and heedless,
Laughing shook his coal-black tresses,
Answered ever sweet and childlike,
"Do not fear for me, O brother!
Harm and evil come not near me!"
  Once when Peboan, the Winter,
Roofed with ice the Big-Sea-Water,
When the snow-flakes, whirling downward,
Hissed among the withered oak-leaves,
Changed the pine-trees into wigwams,
Covered all the earth with silence,--
Armed with arrows, shod with snow-shoes,
Heeding not his brother's warning,
Fearing not the Evil Spirits,
Forth to hunt the deer with antlers
All alone went Chibiabos.
  Right across the Big-Sea-Water
Sprang with speed the deer before him.
With the wind and snow he followed,
O'er the treacherous ice he followed,
Wild with all the fierce commotion
And the rapture of the hunting.
  But beneath, the Evil Spirits
Lay in ambush, waiting for him,
Broke the treacherous ice beneath him,
Dragged him downward to the bottom,
Buried in the sand his body.
Unktahee, the god of water,
He the god of the Dacotahs,
Drowned him in the deep abysses
Of the lake of Gitche Gumee.
  From the headlands Hiawatha
Sent forth such a wail of anguish,
Such a fearful lamentation,
That the bison paused to listen,
And the wolves howled from the prairies,
And the thunder in the distance
Starting answered "Baim-wawa!"
  Then his face with black he painted,
With his robe his head he covered,
In his wigwam sat lamenting,
Seven long weeks he sat lamenting,
Uttering still this moan of sorrow:--
  "He is dead, the sweet musician!
He the sweetest of all singers!
He has gone from us forever,
He has moved a little nearer
To the Master of all music,
To the Master of all singing!
O my brother, Chibiabos!"
  And the melancholy fir-trees
Waved their dark green fans above him,
Waved their purple cones above him,
Sighing with him to console him,
Mingling with his lamentation
Their complaining, their lamenting.
  Came the Spring, and all the forest
Looked in vain for Chibiabos;
Sighed the rivulet, Sebowisha,
Sighed the rushes in the meadow.
  From the tree-tops sang the bluebird,
Sang the bluebird, the Owaissa,
"Chibiabos! Chibiabos!
He is dead, the sweet musician!"
  From the wigwam sang the robin,
Sang the robin, the Opechee,
"Chibiabos! Chibiabos!
He is dead, the sweetest singer!"
  And at night through all the forest
Went the whippoorwill complaining,
Wailing went the Wawonaissa,
"Chibiabos! Chibiabos!
He is dead, the sweet musician!
He the sweetest of all singers!"
  Then the Medicine-men, the Medas,
The magicians, the Wabenos,
And the Jossakeeds, the Prophets,
Came to visit Hiawatha;
Built a Sacred Lodge beside him,
To appease him, to console him,
Walked in silent, grave procession,
Bearing each a pouch of healing,
Skin of beaver, lynx, or otter,
Filled with magic roots and simples,
Filled with very potent medicines.
  When he heard their steps approaching,
Hiawatha ceased lamenting,
Called no more on Chibiabos;
Naught he questioned, naught he answered,
But his mournful head uncovered,
From his face the mourning colors
Washed he slowly and in silence,
Slowly and in silence followed
Onward to the Sacred Wigwam.
  There a magic drink they gave him,
Made of Nahma-wusk, the spearmint,
And Wabeno-wusk, the yarrow,
Roots of power, and herbs of healing;
Beat their drums, and shook their rattles;
Chanted singly and in chorus,
Mystic songs like these, they chanted.
  "I myself, myself! behold me!
'T is the great Gray Eagle talking;
Come, ye white crows, come and hear him!
The loud-speaking thunder helps me;
All the unseen spirits help me;
I can hear their voices calling,
All around the sky I hear them!
I can blow you strong, my brother,
I can heal you, Hiawatha!"
  "Hi-au-ha!" replied the chorus,
"Way-ha-way!" the mystic chorus.
  "Friends of mine are all the serpents!
Hear me shake my skin of hen-hawk!
Mahng, the white loon, I can kill him;
I can shoot your heart and kill it!
I can blow you strong, my brother,
I can heal you, Hiawatha!"
  "Hi-au-ha!" replied the chorus,
"Way-ha-way!" the mystic chorus.
  "I myself, myself! the prophet!
When I speak the wigwam trembles,
Shakes the Sacred Lodge with terror,
Hands unseen begin to shake it!
When I walk, the sky I tread on
Bends and makes a noise beneath me!
I can blow you strong, my brother!
Rise and speak, O Hiawatha!"
  "Hi-au-ha!" replied the chorus,
"Way-ha-way!" the mystic chorus.
  Then they shook their medicine-pouches
O'er the head of Hiawatha,
Danced their medicine-dance around him;
And upstarting wild and haggard,
Like a man from dreams awakened,
He was healed of all his madness.
As the clouds are swept from heaven,
Straightway from his brain departed
All his moody melancholy;
As the ice is swept from rivers,
Straightway from his heart departed
All his sorrow and affliction.
  Then they summoned Chibiabos
From his grave beneath the waters,
From the sands of Gitche Gumee
Summoned Hiawatha's brother.
And so mighty was the magic
Of that cry and invocation,
That he heard it as he lay there
Underneath the Big-Sea-Water;
From the sand he rose and listened,
Heard the music and the singing,
Came, obedient to the summons,
To the doorway of the wigwam,
But to enter they forbade him.
  Through a chink a coal they gave him,
Through the door a burning fire-brand;
Ruler in the Land of Spirits,
Ruler o'er the dead, they made him,
Telling him a fire to kindle
For all those that died thereafter,
Camp-fires for their night encampments
On their solitary journey
To the kingdom of Ponemah,
To the land of the Hereafter.
  From the village of his childhood,
From the homes of those who knew him,
Passing silent through the forest,
Like a smoke-wreath wafted sideways,
Slowly vanished Chibiabos!
Where he passed, the branches moved not,
Where he trod, the grasses bent not,
And the fallen leaves of last year
Made no sound beneath his footstep.
  Four whole days he journeyed onward
Down the pathway of the dead men;
On the dead-man's strawberry feasted,
Crossed the melancholy river,
On the swinging log he crossed it,
Came unto the Lake of Silver,
In the Stone Canoe was carried
To the Islands of the Blessed,
To the land of ghosts and shadows.
  On that journey, moving slowly,
Many weary spirits saw he,
Panting under heavy burdens,
Laden with war-clubs, bows and arrows,
Robes of fur, and pots and kettles,
And with food that friends had given
For that solitary journey.
  "Ay! why do the living," said they,
"Lay such heavy burdens on us!
Better were it to go naked,
Better were it to go fasting,
Than to bear such heavy burdens
On our long and weary journey!"
Forth then issued Hiawatha,
Wandered eastward, wandered westward,
Teaching men the use of simples
And the antidotes for poisons,
And the cure of all diseases.
Thus was first made known to mortals
All the mystery of Medamin,
All the sacred art of healing.



XVI

PAU-PUK-KEEWIS

You shall hear how Pau-Puk-Keewis,
He, the handsome Yenadizze,
Whom the people called the Storm-Fool,
Vexed the village with disturbance;
You shall hear of all his mischief,
And his flight from Hiawatha,
And his wondrous transmigrations,
And the end of his adventures.
  On the shores of Gitche Gumee,
On the dunes of Nagow Wudjoo,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water
Stood the lodge of Pau-Puk-Keewis.
It was he who in his frenzy
Whirled these drifting sands together,
On the dunes of Nagow Wudjoo,
When, among the guests assembled,
He so merrily and madly
Danced at Hiawatha's wedding,
Danced the Beggar's Dance to please them.
  Now, in search of new adventures,
From his lodge went Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Came with speed into the village,
Found the young men all assembled
In the lodge of old Iagoo,
Listening to his monstrous stories,
To his wonderful adventures.
  He was telling them the story
Of Ojeeg, the Summer-Maker,
How he made a hole in heaven,
How he climbed up into heaven,
And let out the summer-weather,
The perpetual, pleasant Summer;
How the Otter first essayed it;
How the Beaver, Lynx, and Badger
Tried in turn the great achievement,
From the summit of the mountain
Smote their fists against the heavens,
Smote against the sky their foreheads,
Cracked the sky, but could not break it;
How the Wolverine, uprising,
Made him ready for the encounter,
Bent his knees down, like a squirrel,
Drew his arms back, like a cricket.
  "Once he leaped," said old Iagoo,
"Once he leaped, and lo! above him
Bent the sky, as ice in rivers
When the waters rise beneath it;
Twice he leaped, and lo! above him
Cracked the sky, as ice in rivers
When the freshet is at highest!
Thrice he leaped, and lo! above him
Broke the shattered sky asunder,
And he disappeared within it,
And Ojeeg, the Fisher Weasel,
With a bound went in behind him!"
  "Hark you!" shouted Pau-Puk-Keewis
As he entered at the doorway;
"I am tired of all this talking,
Tired of old Iagoo's stories,
Tired of Hiawatha's wisdom.
Here is something to amuse you,
Better than this endless talking."
  Then from out his pouch of wolf-skin
Forth he drew, with solemn manner,
All the game of Bowl and Counters,
Pugasaing, with thirteen pieces.
White on one side were they painted,
And vermilion on the other;
Two Kenabeeks or great serpents,
Two Ininewug or wedge-men,
One great war-club, Pugamaugun,
And one slender fish, the Keego,
Four round pieces, Ozawabeeks,
And three Sheshebwug or ducklings.
All were made of bone and painted,
All except the Ozawabeeks;
These were brass, on one side burnished,
And were black upon the other.
  In a wooden bowl he placed them,
Shook and jostled them together,
Threw them on the ground before him,
Thus exclaiming and explaining:
"Red side up are all the pieces,
And one great Kenabeek standing
On the bright side of a brass piece,
On a burnished Ozawabeek;
Thirteen tens and eight are counted."
  Then again he shook the pieces,
Shook and jostled them together,
Threw them on the ground before him,
Still exclaiming and explaining:
"White are both the great Kenabeeks,
White the Ininewug, the wedge-men,
Red are all the other pieces;
Five tens and an eight are counted."
  Thus he taught the game of hazard,
Thus displayed it and explained it,
Running through its various chances,
Various changes, various meanings:
Twenty curious eyes stared at him,
Full of eagerness stared at him.
  "Many games," said old Iagoo,
"Many games of skill and hazard
Have I seen in different nations,
Have I played in different countries.
He who plays with old Iagoo
Must have very nimble fingers;
Though you think yourself so skilful,
I can beat you, Pau-Puk-Keewis,
I can even give you lessons
In your game of Bowl and Counters!"
  So they sat and played together,
All the old men and the young men,
Played for dresses, weapons, wampum,
Played till midnight, played till morning,
Played until the Yenadizze,
Till the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Of their treasures had despoiled them,
Of the best of all their dresses,
Shirts of deer-skin, robes of ermine,
Belts of wampum, crests of feathers,
Warlike weapons, pipes and pouches.
Twenty eyes glared wildly at him,
Like the eyes of wolves glared at him.
  Said the lucky Pau-Puk-Keewis:
"In my wigwam I am lonely,
In my wanderings and adventures
I have need of a companion,
Fain would have a Meshinauwa,
An attendant and pipe-bearer.
I will venture all these winnings,
All these garments heaped about me,
All this wampum, all these feathers,
On a single throw will venture
All against the young man yonder!"
'T was a youth of sixteen summers,
'T was a nephew of Iagoo;
Face-in-a-Mist, the people called him.
  As the fire burns in a pipe-head
Dusky red beneath the ashes,
So beneath his shaggy eyebrows
Glowed the eyes of old Iagoo.
"Ugh!" he answered very fiercely;
"Ugh!" they answered all and each one.
  Seized the wooden bowl the old man,
Closely in his bony fingers
Clutched the fatal bowl, Onagon,
Shook it fiercely and with fury,
Made the pieces ring together
As he threw them down before him.
  Red were both the great Kenabeeks,
Red the Ininewug, the wedge-men,
Red the Sheshebwug, the ducklings,
Black the four brass Ozawabeeks,
White alone the fish, the Keego;
Only five the pieces counted!
  Then the smiling Pau-Puk-Keewis
Shook the bowl and threw the pieces;
Lightly in the air he tossed them,
And they fell about him scattered;
Dark and bright the Ozawabeeks,
Red and white the other pieces,
And upright among the others
One Ininewug was standing,
Even as crafty Pau-Puk-Keewis
Stood alone among the players,
Saying, "Five tens! mine the game is!"
  Twenty eyes glared at him fiercely,
Like the eyes of wolves glared at him,
As he turned and left the wigwam,
Followed by his Meshinauwa,
By the nephew of Iagoo,
By the tall and graceful stripling,
Bearing in his arms the winnings,
Shirts of deer-skin, robes of ermine,
Belts of wampum, pipes and weapons.
  "Carry them," said Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Pointing with his fan of feathers,
"To my wigwam far to eastward,
On the dunes of Nagow Wudjoo!"
  Hot and red with smoke and gambling
Were the eyes of Pau-Puk-Keewis
As he came forth to the freshness
Of the pleasant Summer morning.
All the birds were singing gayly,
All the streamlets flowing swiftly,
And the heart of Pau-Puk-Keewis
Sang with pleasure as the birds sing,
Beat with triumph like the streamlets,
As he wandered through the village,
In the early gray of morning,
With his fan of turkey-feathers,
With his plumes and tufts of swan's down,
Till he reached the farthest wigwam,
Reached the lodge of Hiawatha.
  Silent was it and deserted;
No one met him at the doorway,
No one came to bid him welcome;
But the birds were singing round it,
In and out and round the doorway,
Hopping, singing, fluttering, feeding,
And aloft upon the ridge-pole
Kahgahgee, the King of Ravens,
Sat with fiery eyes, and, screaming,
Flapped his wings at Pau-Puk-Keewis.
  "All are gone! the lodge is empty!"
Thus it was spake Pau-Puk-Keewis,
In his heart resolving mischief;--
"Gone is wary Hiawatha,
Gone the silly Laughing Water,
Gone Nokomis, the old woman,
And the lodge is left unguarded!"
  By the neck he seized the raven,
Whirled it round him like a rattle,
Like a medicine-pouch he shook it,
Strangled Kahgahgee, the raven,
From the ridge-pole of the wigwam
Left its lifeless body hanging,
As an insult to its master,
As a taunt to Hiawatha.
  With a stealthy step he entered,
Round the lodge in wild disorder
Threw the household things about him,
Piled together in confusion
Bowls of wood and earthen kettles,
Robes of buffalo and beaver,
Skins of otter, lynx, and ermine,
As an insult to Nokomis,
As a taunt to Minnehaha.
  Then departed Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Whistling, singing through the forest,
Whistling gayly to the squirrels,
Who from hollow boughs above him
Dropped their acorn-shells upon him,
Singing gayly to the wood birds,
Who from out the leafy darkness
Answered with a song as merry.
  Then he climbed the rocky headlands,
Looking o'er the Gitche Gumee,
Perched himself upon their summit,
Waiting full of mirth and mischief
The return of Hiawatha.
  Stretched upon his back he lay there;
Far below him plashed the waters,
Plashed and washed the dreamy waters;
Far above him swam the heavens,
Swam the dizzy, dreamy heavens;
Round him hovered, fluttered, rustled
Hiawatha's mountain chickens,
Flock-wise swept and wheeled about him,
Almost brushed him with their pinions.
  And he killed them as he lay there,
Slaughtered them by tens and twenties,
Threw their bodies down the headland,
Threw them on the beach below him,
Till at length Kayoshk, the sea-gull,
Perched upon a crag above them,
Shouted: "It is Pau-Puk-Keewis!
He is slaying us by hundreds!
Send a message to our brother,
Tidings send to Hiawatha!"



XVII

THE HUNTING OF PAU-PUK-KEEWIS

Full of wrath was Hiawatha
When he came into the village,
Found the people in confusion,
Heard of all the misdemeanors,
All the malice and the mischief,
Of the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis.
  Hard his breath came through his nostrils,
Through his teeth he buzzed and muttered
Words of anger and resentment,
Hot and humming, like a hornet.
"I will slay this Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Slay this mischief-maker!" said he.
"Not so long and wide the world is,
Not so rude and rough the way is,
That my wrath shall not attain him,
That my vengeance shall not reach him!"
   Then in swift pursuit departed
Hiawatha and the hunters
On the trail of Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Through the forest, where he passed it,
To the headlands where he rested;
But they found not Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Only in the trampled grasses,
In the whortleberry-bushes,
Found the couch where he had rested,
Found the impress of his body.
  From the lowlands far beneath them,
From the Muskoday, the meadow,
Pau-Puk-Keewis, turning backward,
Made a gesture of defiance,
Made a gesture of derision;
And aloud cried Hiawatha,
From the summit of the mountains:
"Not so long and wide the world is,
Not so rude and rough the way is,
But my wrath shall overtake you,
And my vengeance shall attain you!"
  Over rock and over river,
Through bush, and brake, and forest,
Ran the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis;
Like an antelope he bounded,
Till he came unto a streamlet
In the middle of the forest,
To a streamlet still and tranquil,
That had overflowed its margin,
To a dam made by the beavers,
To a pond of quiet water,
Where knee-deep the trees were standing,
Where the water lilies floated,
Where the rushes waved and whispered.
  On the dam stood Pau-Puk-Keewis,
On the dam of trunks and branches,
Through whose chinks the water spouted,
O'er whose summit flowed the streamlet.
From the bottom rose the beaver,
Looked with two great eyes of wonder,
Eyes that seemed to ask a question,
At the stranger, Pau-Puk-Keewis.
  On the dam stood Pau-Puk-Keewis,
O'er his ankles flowed the streamlet,
Flowed the bright and silvery water,
And he spake unto the beaver,
With a smile he spake in this wise:
  "O my friend Ahmeek, the beaver,
Cool and pleasant is the water;
Let me dive into the water,
Let me rest there in your lodges;
Change me, too, into a beaver!"
  Cautiously replied the beaver,
With reserve he thus made answer:
"Let me first consult the others,
Let me ask the other beavers."
Down he sank into the water,
Heavily sank he, as a stone sinks,
Down among the leaves and branches,
Brown and matted at the bottom.
  On the dam stood Pau-Puk-Keewis,
O'er his ankles flowed the streamlet,
Spouted through the chinks below him,
Dashed upon the stones beneath him,
Spread serene and calm before him,
And the sunshine and the shadows
Fell in flecks and gleams upon him,
Fell in little shining patches,
Through the waving, rustling branches.
  From the bottom rose the beavers,
Silently above the surface
Rose one head and then another,
Till the pond seemed full of beavers,
Full of black and shining faces.
  To the beavers Pau-Puk-Keewis
Spake entreating, said in this wise:
"Very pleasant is your dwelling,
O my friends! and safe from danger;
Can you not, with all your cunning,
All your wisdom and contrivance,
Change me, too, into a beaver?"
  "Yes!" replied Ahmeek, the beaver,
He the King of all the beavers,
"Let yourself slide down among us,
Down into the tranquil water."
  Down into the pond among them
Silently sank Pau-Puk-Keewis;
Black became his shirt of deer-skin,
Black his moccasins and leggings,
In a broad black tail behind him
Spread his fox-tails and his fringes;
He was changed into a beaver.
  "Make me large," said Pau-Puk-Keewis,
"Make me large and make me larger,
Larger than the other beavers."
"Yes," the beaver chief responded,
"When our lodge below you enter,
In our wigwam we will make you
Ten times larger than the others."
  Thus into the clear, brown water
Silently sank Pau-Puk-Keewis:
Found the bottom covered over
With the trunks of trees and branches,
Hoards of food against the winter,
Piles and heaps against the famine;
Found the lodge with arching doorway,
Leading into spacious chambers.
  Here they made him large and larger,
Made him largest of the beavers,
Ten times larger than the others.
"You shall be our ruler," said they;
"Chief and King of all the beavers."
  But not long had Pau-Puk-Keewis
Sat in state among the beavers,
When there came a voice of warning
From the watchman at his station
In the water-flags and lilies,
Saying, "Here Is Hiawatha!
Hiawatha with his hunters!"
  Then they heard a cry above them,
Heard a shouting and a tramping,
Heard a crashing and a rushing,
And the water round and o'er them
Sank and sucked away in eddies,
And they knew their dam was broken.
  On the lodge's roof the hunters
Leaped, and broke it all asunder;
Streamed the sunshine through the crevice,
Sprang the beavers through the doorway,
Hid themselves in deeper water,
In the channel of the streamlet;
But the mighty Pau-Puk-Keewis
Could not pass beneath the doorway;
He was puffed with pride and feeding,
He was swollen like a bladder.
  Through the roof looked Hiawatha,
Cried aloud, "O Pau-Puk-Keewis
Vain are all your craft and cunning,
Vain your manifold disguises!
Well I know you, Pau-Puk-Keewis!"
  With their clubs they beat and bruised him,
Beat to death poor Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Pounded him as maize is pounded,
Till his skull was crushed to pieces.
  Six tall hunters, lithe and limber,
Bore him home on poles and branches,
Bore the body of the beaver;
But the ghost, the Jeebi in him,
Thought and felt as Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Still lived on as Pau-Puk-Keewis.
  And it fluttered, strove, and struggled,
Waving hither, waving thither,
As the curtains of a wigwam
Struggle with their thongs of deer-skin,
When the wintry wind is blowing;
Till it drew itself together,
Till it rose up from the body,
Till it took the form and features
Of the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis
Vanishing into the forest.
  But the wary Hiawatha
Saw the figure ere it vanished,
Saw the form of Pau-Puk-Keewis
Glide into the soft blue shadow
Of the pine-trees of the forest;
Toward the squares of white beyond it,
Toward an opening in the forest.
Like a wind it rushed and panted,
Bending all the boughs before it,
And behind it, as the rain comes,
Came the steps of Hiawatha.
  To a lake with many islands
Came the breathless Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Where among the water-lilies
Pishnekuh, the brant, were sailing;
Through the tufts of rushes floating,
Steering through the reedy islands.
Now their broad black beaks they lifted,
Now they plunged beneath the water,
Now they darkened in the shadow,
Now they brightened in the sunshine.
  "Pishnekuh!" cried Pau-Puk-Keewis,
"Pishnekuh! my brothers!" said he,
"Change me to a brant with plumage,
With a shining neck and feathers,
Make me large, and make me larger,
Ten times larger than the others."
  Straightway to a brant they changed him,
With two huge and dusky pinions,
With a bosom smooth and rounded,
With a bill like two great paddles,
Made him larger than the others,
Ten times larger than the largest,
Just as, shouting from the forest,
On the shore stood Hiawatha.
  Up they rose with cry and clamor,
With a whir and beat of pinions,
Rose up from the reedy Islands,
From the water-flags and lilies.
And they said to Pau-Puk-Keewis:
"In your flying, look not downward,
Take good heed and look not downward,
Lest some strange mischance should happen,
Lest some great mishap befall you!"
  Fast and far they fled to northward,
Fast and far through mist and sunshine,
Fed among the moors and fen-lands,
Slept among the reeds and rushes.
  On the morrow as they journeyed,
Buoyed and lifted by the South-wind,
Wafted onward by the South-wind,
Blowing fresh and strong behind them,
Rose a sound of human voices,
Rose a clamor from beneath them,
From the lodges of a village,
From the people miles beneath them.
  For the people of the village
Saw the flock of brant with wonder,
Saw the wings of Pau-Puk-Keewis
Flapping far up in the ether,
Broader than two doorway curtains.
  Pau-Puk-Keewis heard the shouting,
Knew the voice of Hiawatha,
Knew the outcry of Iagoo,
And, forgetful of the warning,
Drew his neck in, and looked downward,
And the wind that blew behind him
Caught his mighty fan of feathers,
Sent him wheeling, whirling downward!
  All in vain did Pau-Puk-Keewis
Struggle to regain his balance!
Whirling round and round and downward,
He beheld in turn the village
And in turn the flock above him,
Saw the village coming nearer,
And the flock receding farther,
Heard the voices growing louder,
Heard the shouting and the laughter;
Saw no more the flocks above him,
Only saw the earth beneath him;
Dead out of the empty heaven,
Dead among the shouting people,
With a heavy sound and sullen,
Fell the brant with broken pinions.
  But his soul, his ghost, his shadow,
Still survived as Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Took again the form and features
Of the handsome Yenadizze,
And again went rushing onward,
Followed fast by Hiawatha,
Crying: "Not so wide the world is,
Not so long and rough the way is,
But my wrath shall overtake you,
But my vengeance shall attain you!"
  And so near he came, so near him,
That his hand was stretched to seize him,
His right hand to seize and hold him,
When the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis
Whirled and spun about in circles,
Fanned the air into a whirlwind,
Danced the dust and leaves about him,
And amid the whirling eddies
Sprang into a hollow oak-tree,
Changed himself into a serpent,
Gliding out through root and rubbish.
  With his right hand Hiawatha
Smote amain the hollow oak-tree,
Rent it into shreds and splinters,
Left it lying there in fragments.
But in vain; for Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Once again in human figure,
Full in sight ran on before him,
Sped away in gust and whirlwind,
On the shores of Gitche Gumee,
Westward by the Big-Sea-Water,
Came unto the rocky headlands,
To the Pictured Rocks of sandstone,
Looking over lake and landscape.
  And the Old Man of the Mountain,
He the Manito of Mountains,
Opened wide his rocky doorways,
Opened wide his deep abysses,
Giving Pau-Puk-Keewis shelter
In his caverns dark and dreary,
Bidding Pau-Puk-Keewis welcome
To his gloomy lodge of sandstone.
  There without stood Hiawatha,
Found the doorways closed against him,
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
Smote great caverns in the sandstone,
Cried aloud in tones of thunder,
"Open! I am Hiawatha!"
But the Old Man of the Mountain
Opened not, and made no answer
From the silent crags of sandstone,
From the gloomy rock abysses.
  Then he raised his hands to heaven,
Called imploring on the tempest,
Called Waywassimo, the lightning,
And the thunder, Annemeekee;
And they came with night and darkness,
Sweeping down the Big-Sea-Water
From the distant Thunder Mountains;
And the trembling Pau-Puk-Keewis
Heard the footsteps of the thunder,
Saw the red eyes of the lightning,
Was afraid, and crouched and trembled.
  Then Waywassimo, the lightning,
Smote the doorways of the caverns,
With his war-club smote the doorways,
Smote the jutting crags of sandstone,
And the thunder, Annemeekee,
Shouted down into the caverns,
Saying, "Where is Pau-Puk-Keewis!"
And the crags fell, and beneath them
Dead among the rocky ruins
Lay the cunning Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Lay the handsome Yenadizze,
Slain in his own human figure.
  Ended were his wild adventures,
Ended were his tricks and gambols,
Ended all his craft and cunning,
Ended all his mischief-making,
All his gambling and his dancing,
All his wooing of the maidens.
  Then the noble Hiawatha
Took his soul, his ghost, his shadow,
Spake and said: "O Pau-Puk-Keewis,
Never more in human figure
Shall you search for new adventures;
Never more with jest and laughter
Dance the dust and leaves in whirlwinds;
But above there in the heavens
You shall soar and sail in circles;
I will change you to an eagle,
To Keneu, the great war-eagle,
Chief of all the fowls with feathers,
Chief of Hiawatha's chickens."
  And the name of Pau-Puk-Keewis
Lingers still among the people,
Lingers still among the singers,
And among the story-tellers;
And in Winter, when the snow-flakes
Whirl in eddies round the lodges,
When the wind in gusty tumult
O'er the smoke-flue pipes and whistles,
"There," they cry, "comes Pau-Puk-Keewis;
He is dancing through the village,
He is gathering in his harvest!"



XVIII

THE DEATH OF KWASIND

Far and wide among the nations
Spread the name and fame of Kwasind;
No man dared to strive with Kwasind,
No man could compete with Kwasind.
But the mischievous Puk-Wudjies,
They the envious Little People,
They the fairies and the pygmies,
Plotted and conspired against him.
  "If this hateful Kwasind," said they,
"If this great, outrageous fellow
Goes on thus a little longer,
Tearing everything he touches,
Rending everything to pieces,
Filling all the world with wonder,
What becomes of the Puk-Wudjies?
Who will care for the Puk-Wudjies?
He will tread us down like mushrooms,
Drive us all into the water,
Give our bodies to be eaten
By the wicked Nee-ba-naw-baigs,
By the Spirits of the water!
  So the angry Little People
All conspired against the Strong Man,
All conspired to murder Kwasind,
Yes, to rid the world of Kwasind,
The audacious, overbearing,
Heartless, haughty, dangerous Kwasind!
  Now this wondrous strength of Kwasind
In his crown alone was seated;
In his crown too was his weakness;
There alone could he be wounded,
Nowhere else could weapon pierce him,
Nowhere else could weapon harm him.
  Even there the only weapon
That could wound him, that could slay him,
Was the seed-cone of the pine-tree,
Was the blue cone of the fir-tree.
This was Kwasind's fatal secret,
Known to no man among mortals;
But the cunning Little People,
The Puk-Wudjies, knew the secret,
Knew the only way to kill him.
  So they gathered cones together,
Gathered seed-cones of the pine-tree,
Gathered blue cones of the fir-tree,
In the woods by Taquamenaw,
Brought them to the river's margin,
Heaped them in great piles together,
Where the red rocks from the margin
Jutting overhang the river.
There they lay in wait for Kwasind,
The malicious Little People.
  'T was an afternoon in Summer;
Very hot and still the air was,
Very smooth the gliding river,
Motionless the sleeping shadows:
Insects glistened in the sunshine,
Insects skated on the water,
Filled the drowsy air with buzzing,
With a far resounding war-cry.
  Down the river came the Strong Man,
In his birch canoe came Kwasind,
Floating slowly down the current
Of the sluggish Taquamenaw,
Very languid with the weather,
Very sleepy with the silence.
  From the overhanging branches,
From the tassels of the birch-trees,
Soft the Spirit of Sleep descended;
By his airy hosts surrounded,
His invisible attendants,
Came the Spirit of Sleep, Nepahwin;
Like a burnished Dush-kwo-ne-she,
Like a dragon-fly, he hovered
O'er the drowsy head of Kwasind.
  To his ear there came a murmur
As of waves upon a sea-shore,
As of far-off tumbling waters,
As of winds among the pine-trees;
And he felt upon his forehead
Blows of little airy war-clubs,
Wielded by the slumbrous legions
Of the Spirit of Sleep, Nepahwin,
As of some one breathing on him.
  At the first blow of their war-clubs,
Fell a drowsiness on Kwasind;
At the second blow they smote him,
Motionless his paddle rested;
At the third, before his vision
Reeled the landscape into darkness,
Very sound asleep was Kwasind.
  So he floated down the river,
Like a blind man seated upright,
Floated down the Taquamenaw,
Underneath the trembling birch-trees,
Underneath the wooded headlands,
Underneath the war encampment
Of the pygmies, the Puk-Wudjies.
  There they stood, all armed and waiting,
Hurled the pine-cones down upon him,
Struck him on his brawny shoulders,
On his crown defenceless struck him.
"Death to Kwasind!" was the sudden
War-cry of the Little People.
  And he sideways swayed and tumbled,
Sideways fell into the river,
Plunged beneath the sluggish water
Headlong, as an otter plunges;
And the birch canoe, abandoned,
Drifted empty down the river,
Bottom upward swerved and drifted:
Nothing more was seen of Kwasind.
  But the memory of the Strong Man
Lingered long among the people,
And whenever through the forest
Raged and roared the wintry tempest,
And the branches, tossed and troubled,
Creaked and groaned and split asunder,
"Kwasind!" cried they; "that is Kwasind!
He is gathering in his fire-wood!"



IX

THE GHOSTS

Never stoops the soaring vulture
On his quarry in the desert,
On the sick or wounded bison,
But another vulture, watching
From his high aerial look-out,
Sees the downward plunge, and follows;
And a third pursues the second,
Coming from the invisible ether,
First a speck, and then a vulture,
Till the air is dark with pinions.
  So disasters come not singly;
But as if they watched and waited,
Scanning one another's motions,
When the first descends, the others
Follow, follow, gathering flock-wise
Round their victim, sick and wounded,
First a shadow, then a sorrow,
Till the air is dark with anguish.
  Now, o'er all the dreary North-land,
Mighty Peboan, the Winter,
Breathing on the lakes and rivers,
Into stone had changed their waters.
From his hair he shook the snow-flakes,
Till the plains were strewn with whiteness,
One uninterrupted level,
As if, stooping, the Creator
With his hand had smoothed them over.
Through the forest, wide and wailing,
Roamed the hunter on his snow-shoes;
In the village worked the women,
Pounded maize, or dressed the deer-skin;
And the young men played together
On the ice the noisy ball-play,
On the plain the dance of snow-shoes.
  One dark evening, after sundown,
In her wigwam Laughing Water
Sat with old Nokomis, waiting
For the steps of Hiawatha
Homeward from the hunt returning.
  On their faces gleamed the firelight,
Painting them with streaks of crimson,
In the eyes of old Nokomis
Glimmered like the watery moonlight,
In the eyes of Laughing Water
Glistened like the sun in water;
And behind them crouched their shadows
In the corners of the wigwam,
And the smoke in wreaths above them
Climbed and crowded through the smoke-flue.
  Then the curtain of the doorway
From without was slowly lifted;
Brighter glowed the fire a moment,
And a moment swerved the smoke-wreath,
As two women entered softly,
Passed the doorway uninvited,
Without word of salutation,
Without sign of recognition,
Sat down in the farthest corner,
Crouching low among the shadows.
  From their aspect and their garments,
Strangers seemed they in the village;
Very pale and haggard were they,
As they sat there sad and silent,
Trembling, cowering with the shadows.
  Was it the wind above the smoke-flue,
Muttering down into the wigwam?
Was it the owl, the Koko-koho,
Hooting from the dismal forest?
Sure a voice said in the silence:
"These are corpses clad in garments,
These are ghosts that come to haunt you,
From the kingdom of Ponemah,
From the land of the Hereafter!"
  Homeward now came Hiawatha
From his hunting in the forest,
With the snow upon his tresses,
And the red deer on his shoulders.
At the feet of Laughing Water
Down he threw his lifeless burden;
Nobler, handsomer she thought him,
Than when first he came to woo her,
First threw down the deer before her,
As a token of his wishes,
As a promise of the future.
  Then he turned and saw the strangers,
Cowering, crouching with the shadows;
Said within himself, "Who are they?
What strange guests has Minnehaha?"
But he questioned not the strangers,
Only spake to bid them welcome
To his lodge, his food, his fireside.
  When the evening meal was ready,
And the deer had been divided,
Both the pallid guests, the strangers,
Springing from among the shadows,
Seized upon the choicest portions,
Seized the white fat of the roebuck,
Set apart for Laughing Water,
For the wife of Hiawatha;
Without asking, without thanking,
Eagerly devoured the morsels,
Flitted back among the shadows
In the corner of the wigwam.
   Not a word spake Hiawatha,
Not a motion made Nokomis,
Not a gesture Laughing Water;
Not a change came o'er their features;
Only Minnehaha softly
Whispered, saying, "They are famished;
Let them do what best delights them;
Let them eat, for they are famished."
  Many a daylight dawned and darkened,
Many a night shook off the daylight
As the pine shakes off the snow-flakes
From the midnight of its branches;
Day by day the guests unmoving
Sat there silent in the wigwam;
But by night, in storm or starlight,
Forth they went into the forest,
Bringing fire-wood to the wigwam,
Bringing pine-cones for the burning,
Always sad and always silent.
  And whenever Hiawatha
Came from fishing or from hunting,
When the evening meal was ready,
And the food had been divided,
Gliding from their darksome corner,
Came the pallid guests, the strangers,
Seized upon the choicest portions
Set aside for Laughing Water,
And without rebuke or question
Flitted back among the shadows.
  Never once had Hiawatha
By a word or look reproved them;
Never once had old Nokomis
Made a gesture of impatience;
Never once had Laughing Water
Shown resentment at the outrage.
All had they endured in silence,
That the rights of guest and stranger,
That the virtue of free-giving,
By a look might not be lessened,
By a word might not be broken.
  Once at midnight Hiawatha,
Ever wakeful, ever watchful,
In the wigwam, dimly lighted
By the brands that still were burning,
By the glimmering, flickering firelight
Heard a sighing, oft repeated,
Heard a sobbing, as of sorrow.
  From his couch rose Hiawatha,
From his shaggy hides of bison,
Pushed aside the deer-skin curtain,
Saw the pallid guests, the shadows,
Sitting upright on their couches,
Weeping in the silent midnight.
  And he said: "O guests! why is it
That your hearts are so afflicted,
That you sob so in the midnight?
Has perchance the old Nokomis,
Has my wife, my Minnehaha,
Wronged or grieved you by unkindness,
Failed in hospitable duties?"
  Then the shadows ceased from weeping,
Ceased from sobbing and lamenting,
And they said, with gentle voices:
"We are ghosts of the departed,
Souls of those who once were with you.
From the realms of Chibiabos
Hither have we come to try you,
Hither have we come to warn you.
  "Cries of grief and lamentation
Reach us in the Blessed Islands;
Cries of anguish from the living,
Calling back their friends departed,
Sadden us with useless sorrow.
Therefore have we come to try you;
No one knows us, no one heeds us.
We are but a burden to you,
And we see that the departed
Have no place among the living.
  "Think of this, O Hiawatha!
Speak of it to all the people,
That henceforward and forever
They no more with lamentations
Sadden the souls of the departed
In the Islands of the Blessed.
  "Do not lay such heavy burdens
In the graves of those you bury,
Not such weight of furs and wampum,
Not such weight of pots and kettles,
For the spirits faint beneath them.
Only give them food to carry,
Only give them fire to light them.
  "Four days is the spirit's journey
To the land of ghosts and shadows,
Four its lonely night encampments;
Four times must their fires be lighted.
Therefore, when the dead are buried,
Let a fire, as night approaches,
Four times on the grave be kindled,
That the soul upon its journey
May not lack the cheerful firelight,
May not grope about in darkness.
  "Farewell, noble Hiawatha!
We have put you to the trial,
To the proof have put your patience,
By the insult of our presence,
By the outrage of our actions.
We have found you great and noble.
Fail not in the greater trial,
Faint not in the harder struggle."
   When they ceased, a sudden darkness
Fell and filled the silent wigwam.
Hiawatha heard a rustle
As of garments trailing by him,
Heard the curtain of the doorway
Lifted by a hand he saw not,
Felt the cold breath of the night air,
For a moment saw the starlight;
But he saw the ghosts no longer,
Saw no more the wandering spirits
From the kingdom of Ponemah,
From the land of the Hereafter.



XX

THE FAMINE

Oh the long and dreary Winter!
Oh the cold and cruel Winter!
Ever thicker, thicker, thicker
Froze the ice on lake and river,
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper
Fell the snow o'er all the landscape,
Fell the covering snow, and drifted
Through the forest, round the village.
Hardly from his buried wigwam
Could the hunter force a passage;
With his mittens and his snow-shoes
Vainly walked he through the forest,
Sought for bird or beast and found none,
Saw no track of deer or rabbit,
In the snow beheld no footprints,
In the ghastly, gleaming forest
Fell, and could not rise from weakness,
Perished there from cold and hunger.
  Oh the famine and the fever!
Oh the wasting of the famine!
Oh the blasting of the fever!
Oh the wailing of the children!
Oh the anguish of the women!
  All the earth was sick and famished;
Hungry was the air around them,
Hungry was the sky above them,
And the hungry stars in heaven
Like the eyes of wolves glared at them!
  Into Hiawatha's wigwam
Came two other guests, as silent
As the ghosts were, and as gloomy,
Waited not to be invited
Did not parley at the doorway
Sat there without word of welcome
In the seat of Laughing Water;
Looked with haggard eyes and hollow
At the face of Laughing Water.
  And the foremost said: "Behold me!
I am Famine, Bukadawin!"
And the other said: "Behold me!
I am Fever, Ahkosewin!"
  And the lovely Minnehaha
Shuddered as they looked upon her,
Shuddered at the words they uttered,
Lay down on her bed in silence,
Hid her face, but made no answer;
Lay there trembling, freezing, burning
At the looks they cast upon her,
At the fearful words they uttered.
  Forth into the empty forest
Rushed the maddened Hiawatha;
In his heart was deadly sorrow,
In his face a stony firmness;
On his brow the sweat of anguish
Started, but it froze and fell not.
  Wrapped in furs and armed for hunting,
With his mighty bow of ash-tree,
With his quiver full of arrows,
With his mittens, Minjekahwun,
Into the vast and vacant forest
On his snow-shoes strode he forward.
  "Gitche Manito, the Mighty!"
Cried he with his face uplifted
In that bitter hour of anguish,
"Give your children food, O father!
Give us food, or we must perish!
Give me food for Minnehaha,
For my dying Minnehaha!"
  Through the far-resounding forest,
Through the forest vast and vacant
Rang that cry of desolation,
But there came no other answer
Than the echo of his crying,
Than the echo of the woodlands,
"Minnehaha! Minnehaha!"
  All day long roved Hiawatha
In that melancholy forest,
Through the shadow of whose thickets,
In the pleasant days of Summer,
Of that ne'er forgotten Summer,
He had brought his young wife homeward
From the land of the Dacotahs;
When the birds sang in the thickets,
And the streamlets laughed and glistened,
And the air was full of fragrance,
And the lovely Laughing Water
Said with voice that did not tremble,
"I will follow you, my husband!"
  In the wigwam with Nokomis,
With those gloomy guests that watched her,
With the Famine and the Fever,
She was lying, the Beloved,
She, the dying Minnehaha.
  "Hark!" she said; "I hear a rushing,
Hear a roaring and a rushing,
Hear the Falls of Minnehaha
Calling to me from a distance!"
"No, my child!" said old Nokomis,
"'T is the night-wind in the pine-trees!"
"Look!" she said; "I see my father
Standing lonely at his doorway,
Beckoning to me from his wigwam
In the land of the Dacotahs!"
"No, my child!" said old Nokomis.
"'T is the smoke, that waves and beckons!"
"Ah!" said she, "the eyes of Pauguk
Glare upon me in the darkness,
I can feel his icy fingers
Clasping mine amid the darkness!
Hiawatha! Hiawatha!"
  And the desolate Hiawatha,
Far away amid the forest,
Miles away among the mountains,
Heard that sudden cry of anguish,
Heard the voice of Minnehaha
Calling to him in the darkness,
"Hiawatha! Hiawatha!"
  Over snow-fields waste and pathless,
Under snow-encumbered branches,
Homeward hurried Hiawatha,
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,
Heard Nokomis moaning, wailing:
"Wahonowin! Wahonowin!
Would that I had perished for you,
Would that I were dead as you are!
Wahonowin! Wahonowin!"
  And he rushed into the wigwam,
Saw the old Nokomis slowly
Rocking to and fro and moaning,
Saw his lovely Minnehaha
Lying dead and cold before him,
And his bursting heart within him
Uttered such a cry of anguish,
That the forest moaned and shuddered,
That the very stars in heaven
Shook and trembled with his anguish.
  Then he sat down, still and speechless,
On the bed of Minnehaha,
At the feet of Laughing Water,
At those willing feet, that never
More would lightly run to meet him,
Never more would lightly follow.
  With both hands his face he covered,
Seven long days and nights he sat there,
As if in a swoon he sat there,
Speechless, motionless, unconscious
Of the daylight or the darkness.
  Then they buried Minnehaha;
In the snow a grave they made her
In the forest deep and darksome
Underneath the moaning hemlocks;
Clothed her in her richest garments
Wrapped her in her robes of ermine,
Covered her with snow, like ermine;
Thus they buried Minnehaha.
  And at night a fire was lighted,
On her grave four times was kindled,
For her soul upon its journey
To the Islands of the Blessed.
From his doorway Hiawatha
Saw it burning in the forest,
Lighting up the gloomy hemlocks;
From his sleepless bed uprising,
From the bed of Minnehaha,
Stood and watched it at the doorway,
That it might not be extinguished,
Might not leave her in the darkness.
  "Farewell!" said he, "Minnehaha!
Farewell, O my Laughing Water!
All my heart is buried with you,
All my thoughts go onward with you!
Come not back again to labor,
Come not back again to suffer,
Where the Famine and the Fever
Wear the heart and waste the body.
Soon my task will be completed,
Soon your footsteps I shall follow
To the Islands of the Blessed,
To the Kingdom of Ponemah,
To the Land of the Hereafter!"



XXI

THE WHITE MAN'S FOOT

In his lodge beside a river,
Close beside a frozen river,
Sat an old man, sad and lonely.
White his hair was as a snow-drift;
Dull and low his fire was burning,
And the old man shook and trembled,
Folded in his Waubewyon,
In his tattered white-skin-wrapper,
Hearing nothing but the tempest
As it roared along the forest,
Seeing nothing but the snow-storm,
As it whirled and hissed and drifted.
  All the coals were white with ashes,
And the fire was slowly dying,
As a young man, walking lightly,
At the open doorway entered.
Red with blood of youth his cheeks were,
Soft his eyes, as stars in Spring-time,
Bound his forehead was with grasses;
Bound and plumed with scented grasses,
On his lips a smile of beauty,
Filling all the lodge with sunshine,
In his hand a bunch of blossoms
Filling all the lodge with sweetness.
  "Ah, my son!" exclaimed the old man,
"Happy are my eyes to see you.
Sit here on the mat beside me,
Sit here by the dying embers,
Let us pass the night together,
Tell me of your strange adventures,
Of the lands where you have travelled;
I will tell you of my prowess,
Of my many deeds of wonder."
  From his pouch he drew his peace-pipe,
Very old and strangely fashioned;
Made of red stone was the pipe-head,
And the stem a reed with feathers;
Filled the pipe with bark of willow,
Placed a burning coal upon it,
Gave it to his guest, the stranger,
And began to speak in this wise:
"When I blow my breath about me,
When I breathe upon the landscape,
Motionless are all the rivers,
Hard as stone becomes the water!"
  And the young man answered, smiling:
"When I blow my breath about me,
When I breathe upon the landscape,
Flowers spring up o'er all the meadows,
Singing, onward rush the rivers!"
  "When I shake my hoary tresses,"
Said the old man darkly frowning,
"All the land with snow is covered;
All the leaves from all the branches
Fall and fade and die and wither,
For I breathe, and lo! they are not.
From the waters and the marshes,
Rise the wild goose and the heron,
Fly away to distant regions,
For I speak, and lo! they are not.
And where'er my footsteps wander,
All the wild beasts of the forest
Hide themselves in holes and caverns,
And the earth becomes as flintstone!"
  "When I shake my flowing ringlets,"
Said the young man, softly laughing,
"Showers of rain fall warm and welcome,
Plants lift up their heads rejoicing,
Back into their lakes and marshes
Come the wild goose and the heron,
Homeward shoots the arrowy swallow,
Sing the bluebird and the robin,
And where'er my footsteps wander,
All the meadows wave with blossoms,
All the woodlands ring with music,
All the trees are dark with foliage!"
  While they spake, the night departed:
From the distant realms of Wabun,
From his shining lodge of silver,
Like a warrior robed and painted,
Came the sun, and said, "Behold me
Gheezis, the great sun, behold me!"
  Then the old man's tongue was speechless
And the air grew warm and pleasant,
And upon the wigwam sweetly
Sang the bluebird and the robin,
And the stream began to murmur,
And a scent of growing grasses
Through the lodge was gently wafted.
  And Segwun, the youthful stranger,
More distinctly in the daylight
Saw the icy face before him;
It was Peboan, the Winter!
  From his eyes the tears were flowing,
As from melting lakes the streamlets,
And his body shrunk and dwindled
As the shouting sun ascended,
Till into the air it faded,
Till into the ground it vanished,
And the young man saw before him,
On the hearth-stone of the wigwam,
Where the fire had smoked and smouldered,
Saw the earliest flower of Spring-time,
Saw the Beauty of the Spring-time,
Saw the Miskodeed in blossom.
  Thus it was that in the North-land
After that unheard-of coldness,
That intolerable Winter,
Came the Spring with all its splendor,
All its birds and all its blossoms,
All its flowers and leaves and grasses.
  Sailing on the wind to northward,
Flying in great flocks, like arrows,
Like huge arrows shot through heaven,
Passed the swan, the Mahnahbezee,
Speaking almost as a man speaks;
And in long lines waving, bending
Like a bow-string snapped asunder,
Came the white goose, Waw-be-wawa;
And in pairs, or singly flying,
Mahng the loon, with clangorous pinions,
The blue heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
And the grouse, the Mushkodasa.
  In the thickets and the meadows
Piped the bluebird, the Owaissa,
On the summit of the lodges
Sang the robin, the Opechee,
In the covert of the pine-trees
Cooed the pigeon, the Omemee;
And the sorrowing Hiawatha,
Speechless in his infinite sorrow,
Heard their voices calling to him,
Went forth from his gloomy doorway,
Stood and gazed into the heaven,
Gazed upon the earth and waters.
  From his wanderings far to eastward,
From the regions of the morning,
From the shining land of Wabun,
Homeward now returned Iagoo,
The great traveller, the great boaster,
Full of new and strange adventures,
Marvels many and many wonders.
  And the people of the village
Listened to him as he told them
Of his marvellous adventures,
Laughing answered him in this wise:
"Ugh! it is indeed Iagoo!
No one else beholds such wonders!"
  He had seen, he said, a water
Bigger than the Big-Sea-Water,
Broader than the Gitche Gumee,
Bitter so that none could drink it!
At each other looked the warriors,
Looked the women at each other,
Smiled, and said, "It cannot be so!"
Kaw!" they said, it cannot be so!"
  O'er it, said he, o'er this water
Came a great canoe with pinions,
A canoe with wings came flying,
Bigger than a grove of pine-trees,
Taller than the tallest tree-tops!
And the old men and the women
Looked and tittered at each other;
"Kaw!" they said, "we don't believe it!"
  From its mouth, he said, to greet him,
Came Waywassimo, the lightning,
Came the thunder, Annemeekee!
And the warriors and the women
Laughed aloud at poor Iagoo;
"Kaw!" they said, "what tales you tell us!"
  In it, said he, came a people,
In the great canoe with pinions
Came, he said, a hundred warriors;
Painted white were all their faces
And with hair their chins were covered!
And the warriors and the women
Laughed and shouted in derision,
Like the ravens on the tree-tops,
Like the crows upon the hemlocks.
"Kaw!" they said, "what lies you tell us!
Do not think that we believe them!"
  Only Hiawatha laughed not,
But he gravely spake and answered
To their jeering and their jesting:
"True is all Iagoo tells us;
I have seen it in a vision,
Seen the great canoe with pinions,
Seen the people with white faces,
Seen the coming of this bearded
People of the wooden vessel
From the regions of the morning,
From the shining land of Wabun.
  "Gitche Manito, the Mighty,
The Great Spirit, the Creator,
Sends them hither on his errand.
Sends them to us with his message.
Wheresoe'er they move, before them
Swarms the stinging fly, the Ahmo,
Swarms the bee, the honey-maker;
Wheresoe'er they tread, beneath them
Springs a flower unknown among us,
Springs the White-man's Foot in blossom.
  "Let us welcome, then, the strangers,
Hail them as our friends and brothers,
And the heart's right hand of friendship
Give them when they come to see us.
Gitche Manito, the Mighty,
Said this to me in my vision.
  "I beheld, too, in that vision
All the secrets of the future,
Of the distant days that shall be.
I beheld the westward marches
Of the unknown, crowded nations.
All the land was full of people,
Restless, struggling, toiling, striving,
Speaking many tongues, yet feeling
But one heart-beat in their bosoms.
In the woodlands rang their axes,
Smoked their towns in all the valleys,
Over all the lakes and rivers
Rushed their great canoes of thunder.
  "Then a darker, drearier vision
Passed before me, vague and cloud-like;
I beheld our nation scattered,
All forgetful of my counsels,
Weakened, warring with each other;
Saw the remnants of our people
Sweeping westward, wild and woful,
Like the cloud-rack of a tempest,
Like the withered leaves of Autumn!"



XXII

HIAWATHA'S DEPARTURE

By the shore of Gitche Gumee,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
At the doorway of his wigwam,
In the pleasant Summer morning,
Hiawatha stood and waited.
All the air was full of freshness,
All the earth was bright and joyous,
And before him, through the sunshine,
Westward toward the neighboring forest
Passed in golden swarms the Ahmo,
Passed the bees, the honey-makers,
Burning, singing in the sunshine.
  Bright above him shone the heavens,
Level spread the lake before him;
From its bosom leaped the sturgeon,
Sparkling, flashing in the sunshine;
On its margin the great forest
Stood reflected in the water,
Every tree-top had its shadow,
Motionless beneath the water.
  From the brow of Hiawatha
Gone was every trace of sorrow,
As the fog from off the water,
As the mist from off the meadow.
With a smile of joy and triumph,
With a look of exultation,
As of one who in a vision
Sees what is to be, but is not,
Stood and waited Hiawatha.
  Toward the sun his hands were lifted,
Both the palms spread out against it,
And between the parted fingers
Fell the sunshine on his features,
Flecked with light his naked shoulders,
As it falls and flecks an oak-tree
Through the rifted leaves and branches.
  O'er the water floating, flying,
Something in the hazy distance,
Something in the mists of morning,
Loomed and lifted from the water,
Now seemed floating, now seemed flying,
Coming nearer, nearer, nearer.
  Was it Shingebis the diver?
Or the pelican, the Shada?
Or the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah?
Or the white goose, Waw-be-wawa,
With the water dripping, flashing,
From its glossy neck and feathers?
  It was neither goose nor diver,
Neither pelican nor heron,
O'er the water floating, flying,
Through the shining mist of morning,
But a birch canoe with paddles,
Rising, sinking on the water,
Dripping, flashing in the sunshine;
And within it came a people
From the distant land of Wabun,
From the farthest realms of morning
Came the Black-Robe chief, the Prophet,
He the Priest of Prayer, the Pale-face,
With his guides and his companions.
  And the noble Hiawatha,
With his hands aloft extended,
Held aloft in sign of welcome,
Waited, full of exultation,
Till the birch canoe with paddles
Grated on the shining pebbles,
Stranded on the sandy margin,
Till the Black-Robe chief, the Pale-face,
With the cross upon his bosom,
Landed on the sandy margin.
  Then the joyous Hiawatha
Cried aloud and spake in this wise:
"Beautiful is the sun, O strangers,
When you come so far to see us!
All our town in peace awaits you,
All our doors stand open for you;
You shall enter all our wigwams,
For the heart's right hand we give you.
  "Never bloomed the earth so gayly,
Never shone the sun so brightly,
As to-day they shine and blossom
When you come so far to see us!
Never was our lake so tranquil,
Nor so free from rocks, and sand-bars;
For your birch canoe in passing
Has removed both rock and sand-bar.
  "Never before had our tobacco
Such a sweet and pleasant flavor,
Never the broad leaves of our cornfields
Were so beautiful to look on,
As they seem to us this morning,
When you come so far to see us!'
  And the Black-Robe chief made answer,
Stammered in his speech a little,
Speaking words yet unfamiliar:
"Peace be with you, Hiawatha,
Peace be with you and your people,
Peace of prayer, and peace of pardon,
Peace of Christ, and joy of Mary!"
  Then the generous Hiawatha
Led the strangers to his wigwam,
Seated them on skins of bison,
Seated them on skins of ermine,
And the careful old Nokomis
Brought them food in bowls of basswood,
Water brought in birchen dippers,
And the calumet, the peace-pipe,
Filled and lighted for their smoking.
  All the old men of the village,
All the warriors of the nation,
All the Jossakeeds, the Prophets,
The magicians, the Wabenos,
And the Medicine-men, the Medas,
Came to bid the strangers welcome;
"It is well", they said, "O brothers,
That you come so far to see us!"
  In a circle round the doorway,
With their pipes they sat in silence,
Waiting to behold the strangers,
Waiting to receive their message;
Till the Black-Robe chief, the Pale-face,
From the wigwam came to greet them,
Stammering in his speech a little,
Speaking words yet unfamiliar;
"It is well," they said, "O brother,
That you come so far to see us!"
  Then the Black-Robe chief, the Prophet,
Told his message to the people,
Told the purport of his mission,
Told them of the Virgin Mary,
And her blessed Son, the Saviour,
How in distant lands and ages
He had lived on earth as we do;
How he fasted, prayed, and labored;
How the Jews, the tribe accursed,
Mocked him, scourged him, crucified him;
How he rose from where they laid him,
Walked again with his disciples,
And ascended into heaven.
  And the chiefs made answer, saying:
"We have listened to your message,
We have heard your words of wisdom,
We will think on what you tell us.
It is well for us, O brothers,
That you come so far to see us!"
  Then they rose up and departed
Each one homeward to his wigwam,
To the young men and the women
Told the story of the strangers
Whom the Master of Life had sent them
From the shining land of Wabun.
  Heavy with the heat and silence
Grew the afternoon of Summer;
With a drowsy sound the forest
Whispered round the sultry wigwam,
With a sound of sleep the water
Rippled on the beach below it;
From the cornfields shrill and ceaseless
Sang the grasshopper, Pah-puk-keena;
And the guests of Hiawatha,
Weary with the heat of Summer,
Slumbered in the sultry wigwam.
  Slowly o'er the simmering landscape
Fell the evening's dusk and coolness,
And the long and level sunbeams
Shot their spears into the forest,
Breaking through its shields of shadow,
Rushed into each secret ambush,
Searched each thicket, dingle, hollow;
Still the guests of Hiawatha
Slumbered in the silent wigwam.
  From his place rose Hiawatha,
Bade farewell to old Nokomis,
Spake in whispers, spake in this wise,
Did not wake the guests, that slumbered.
  "I am going, O Nokomis,
On a long and distant journey,
To the portals of the Sunset.
To the regions of the home-wind,
Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin.
But these guests I leave behind me,
In your watch and ward I leave them;
See that never harm comes near them,
See that never fear molests them,
Never danger nor suspicion,
Never want of food or shelter,
In the lodge of Hiawatha!"
  Forth into the village went he,
Bade farewell to all the warriors,
Bade farewell to all the young men,
Spake persuading, spake in this wise:
  "I am going, O my people,
On a long and distant journey;
Many moons and many winters
Will have come, and will have vanished,
Ere I come again to see you.
But my guests I leave behind me;
Listen to their words of wisdom,
Listen to the truth they tell you,
For the Master of Life has sent them
From the land of light and morning!"
  On the shore stood Hiawatha,
Turned and waved his hand at parting;
On the clear and luminous water
Launched his birch canoe for sailing,
From the pebbles of the margin
Shoved it forth into the water;
Whispered to it, "Westward! westward!"
And with speed it darted forward.
  And the evening sun descending
Set the clouds on fire with redness,
Burned the broad sky, like a prairie,
Left upon the level water
One long track and trail of splendor,
Down whose stream, as down a river,
Westward, westward Hiawatha
Sailed into the fiery sunset,
Sailed into the purple vapors,
Sailed into the dusk of evening:
  And the people from the margin
Watched him floating, rising, sinking,
Till the birch canoe seemed lifted
High into that sea of splendor,
Till it sank into the vapors
Like the new moon slowly, slowly
Sinking in the purple distance.
  And they said, "Farewell forever!"
Said, "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
And the forests, dark and lonely,
Moved through all their depths of darkness,
Sighed, "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
And the waves upon the margin
Rising, rippling on the pebbles,
Sobbed, "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
From her haunts among the fen-lands,
Screamed, "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
   Thus departed Hiawatha,
Hiawatha the Beloved,
In the glory of the sunset,.
In the purple mists of evening,
To the regions of the home-wind,
Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
To the Islands of the Blessed,
To the Kingdom of Ponemah,
To the Land of the Hereafter!



NOTES
THE SONG OF HIAWATHA.

This Indian Edda--if I may so call it--is founded on a tradition
prevalent among the North American Indians, of a personage of
miraculous birth, who was sent among them to clear their rivers,
forests, and fishing-grounds, and to teach them the arts of
peace.

He was known among different tribes by the several names of
Michabou, Chiabo, Manabozo, Tarenyawagon, and Hiawatha.  Mr.
Schoolcraft gives an account of him in his Algic Researches, Vol. I.
p. 134; and in his History, Condition, and Prospects of the Indian
Tribes of the United States, Part III. p. 314, may be found the
Iroquois form of the tradition, derived from the verbal narrations
of an Onondaga chief.

Into this old tradition I have woven other curious Indian legends,
drawn chiefly from the various and valuable writings of Mr.
Schoolcraft, to whom the literary world is greatly indebted for his
indefatigable zeal in rescuing from oblivion so much of the
legendary lore of the Indians.

The scene of the poem is among the Ojibways on the southern shore of
Lake Superior, in the region between the Pictured Rocks and the
Grand Sable.

VOCABULARY

Adjidau'mo, the red squirrel.
Ahdeek', the reindeer.
Ahkose'win, fever.
Ahmeek', the beaver.
Algon'quin, Ojibway.
Annemee'kee, the thunder.
Apuk'wa. a bulrush.
Baim-wa'wa, the sound of the thunder.
Bemah'gut, the grapevine.
Be'na, the pheasant.
Big-Sea-Water, Lake Superior.
Bukada'win, famine.
Chemaun', a birch canoe.
Chetowaik', the plover.
Chibia'bos, a musician; friend of Hiawatha; ruler in the Land of Spirits.
Dahin'da, the bull frog.
Dush-kwo-ne'she or Kwo-ne'she, the dragon fly.
Esa, shame upon you.
Ewa-yea', lullaby.
Ghee'zis, the sun.
Gitche Gu'mee, The Big-Sea-Water, Lake Superior.
Gitche Man'ito, the Great Spirit, the Master of Life.
Gushkewau', the darkness.
Hiawa'tha, the Wise Man, the Teacher, son of Mudjekeewis, the
    WestWind and Wenonah, daughter of Nokomis.
Ia'goo, a great boaster and story-teller.
Inin'ewug, men, or pawns in the Game of the Bowl.
Ishkoodah', fire, a comet.
Jee'bi, a ghost, a spirit.
Joss'akeed, a prophet.
Kabibonok'ka, the North-Wind.
Kagh, the hedge-hog.
Ka'go, do not.
Kahgahgee', the raven.
Kaw, no.
Kaween', no indeed.
Kayoshk', the sea-gull.
Kee'go, a fish.
Keeway'din, the Northwest wind, the Home-wind.
Kena'beek, a serpent.
Keneu', the great war-eagle.
Keno'zha, the pickerel.
Ko'ko-ko'ho, the owl.
Kuntasoo', the Game of Plum-stones.
Kwa'sind, the Strong Man.
Kwo-ne'she, or Dush-kwo-ne'she, the dragon-fly.
Mahnahbe'zee, the swan.
Mahng, the loon.
Mahn-go-tay'see, loon-hearted, brave.
Mahnomo'nee, wild rice.
Ma'ma, the woodpecker.
Maskeno'zha, the pike.
Me'da, a medicine-man.
Meenah'ga, the blueberry.
Megissog'won, the great Pearl-Feather, a magician, and the Manito
    of Wealth.
Meshinau'wa, a pipe-bearer.
Minjekah'wun, Hiawatha's mittens.
Minneha'ha, Laughing Water; wife of Hiawatha; a water-fall in a
stream running into the Mississippi between Fort Snelling and the
    Falls of St. Anthony.
Minne-wa'wa, a pleasant sound, as of the wind in the trees.
Mishe-Mo'kwa, the Great Bear.
Mishe-Nah'ma, the Great Sturgeon.
Miskodeed', the Spring-Beauty, the Claytonia Virginica.
Monda'min, Indian corn.
Moon of Bright Nights, April.
Moon of Leaves, May.
Moon of Strawberries, June.
Moon of the Falling Leaves, September.
Moon of Snow-shoes, November.
Mudjekee'wis, the West-Wind; father of Hiawatha.
Mudway-aush'ka, sound of waves on a shore.
Mushkoda'sa, the grouse.
Nah'ma, the sturgeon.
Nah'ma-wusk, spearmint.
Na'gow Wudj'oo, the Sand Dunes of Lake Superior.
Nee-ba-naw'-baigs, water-spirits.
Nenemoo'sha, sweetheart.
Nepah'win, sleep.
Noko'mis, a grandmother, mother of Wenonah.
No'sa, my father.
Nush'ka, look! look!
Odah'min, the strawberry.
Okahah'wis, the fresh-water herring.
Ome'me, the pigeon.
Ona'gon, a bowl.
Onaway', awake.
Ope'chee, the robin.
Osse'o, Son of the Evening Star.
Owais'sa, the bluebird.
Oweenee', wife of Osseo.
Ozawa'beek, a round piece of brass or copper in the Game of the
    Bowl.
Pah-puk-kee'na, the grasshopper.
Pau'guk, death.
Pau-Puk-Kee'wis, the handsome Yenadizze, the son of Storm Fool.
Pauwa'ting, Saut Sainte Marie.
Pe'boan, Winter.
Pem'ican, meat of the deer or buffalo dried and pounded.
Pezhekee', the bison.
Pishnekuh', the brant.
Pone'mah, hereafter.
Pugasaing', Game of the Bowl.
Puggawau'gun, a war-club.
Puk-Wudj'ies, little wild men of the woods; pygmies.
Sah-sah-je'wun, rapids.
Sah'wa, the perch.
Segwun', Spring.
Sha'da, the pelican.
Shahbo'min, the gooseberry.
Shah-shah, long ago.
Shaugoda'ya, a coward.
Shawgashee', the craw-fish.
Shawonda'see, the South-Wind.
Shaw-shaw, the swallow.
Shesh'ebwug, ducks; pieces in the Game of the Bowl.
Shin'gebis, the diver, or grebe.
Showain' neme'shin, pity me.
Shuh-shuh'gah, the blue heron.
Soan-ge-ta'ha, strong-hearted.
Subbeka'she, the spider.
Sugge'me, the mosquito.
To'tem, family coat-of-arms.
Ugh, yes.
Ugudwash', the sun-fish.
Unktahee', the God of Water.
Wabas'so, the rabbit, the North.
Wabe'no, a magician, a juggler.
Wabe'no-wusk, yarrow.
Wa'bun, the East-Wind.
Wa'bun An'nung, the Star of the East, the Morning Star.
Wahono'win, a cry of lamentation.
Wah-wah-tay'see, the fire-fly.
Wam'pum, beads of shell.
Waubewy'on, a white skin wrapper.
Wa'wa, the wild goose.
Waw'beek, a rock.
Waw-be-wa'wa, the white goose.
Wawonais'sa, the whippoorwill.
Way-muk-kwa'na, the caterpillar.
Wen'digoes, giants.
Weno'nah, Hiawatha's mother, daughter of Nokomis.
Yenadiz'ze, an idler and gambler; an Indian dandy.


In the Vale of Tawasentha.

This valley, now called Norman's Kill; is in Albany County, New
York.


On the Mountains of the Prairie.

Mr. Catlin, in his Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and

Condition of the North American Indians, Vol. II p. 160, gives an
interesting account of the Coteau des Prairies, and the Red
Pipestone Quarry.  He says:--

"Here (according to their traditions) happened the mysterious birth
of the red pipe, which has blown its fumes of peace and war to the
remotest corners of the continent; which has visited every warrior,
and passed through its reddened stem the irrevocable oath of war and
desolation.  And here, also, the peace-breathing calumet was born,
and fringed with the eagle's quills, which has shed its thrilling
fumes over the land, and soothed the fury of the relentless savage.

"The Great Spirit at an ancient period here called the Indian
nations together, and, standing on the precipice of the red pipe-
stone rock, broke from its wall a piece, and made a huge pipe by
turning it in his hand, which he smoked over them, and to the North,
the South, the East, and the West, and told them that this stone was
red,--that it was their flesh,--that they must use it for their
pipes of peace,--that it belonged to them all, and that the war-club
and scalping-knife must not be raised on its ground.  At the last
whiff of his pipe his head went into a great cloud, and the whole
surface of the rock for several miles was melted and glazed; two
great ovens were opened beneath, and two women (guardian spirits of
the place) entered them in a blaze of fire; and they are heard there
yet (Tso-mec-cos-tee aud Tso-me-cos-te-won-dee), answering to the
invocations of the high-priests or medicine-men, who consult them
when they are visitors to this sacred place."


Hark you, Bear! you are a coward.

This anecdote is from Heckewelder.  In his account of the Indian
Nations, he describes an Indian hunter as addressing a bear in
nearly these words.  "I was present," he says, "at the delivery of
this curious invective; when the hunter had despatched the bear, I
asked him how he thought that poor animal could understand what he
said to it.  'O,' said he in answer, 'the bear understood me very
well; did you not observe how ashamed he looked while I was
upbraiding him?"'--Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society, Vol. I. p. 240.


Hush! the Naked Bear will hear thee!

Heckewelder, in a letter published in the Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, Vol. IV. p. 260, speaks of this
tradition as prevalent among the Mohicans and Delawares.

"Their reports," he says, "run thus: that among all animals that had
been formerly in this country, this was the most ferocious; that it
was much larger than the largest of the common bears, and remarkably
long-bodied; all over (except a spot of hair on its back of a white
color) naked. . . . .

"The history of this animal used to be a subject of conversation
among the Indians, especially when in the woods a hunting.  I have
also heard them say to their children when crying: 'Hush! the naked
bear will hear you, be upon you, and devour you,'"


Where the Falls of Minnehaha, etc.

"The scenery about Fort Snelling is rich in beauty.  The Falls of
St. Anthony are familiar to travellers, and to readers of Indian
sketches.  Between the fort and these falls are the 'Little Falls,'
forty feet in height, on a stream that empties into the Mississippi.
The Indians called them Mine-hah-hah, or 'laughing waters.'"
-- MRS. EASTMAN'S Dacotah, or Legends of the Sioux, Introd., p. ii.


Sand Hills of the Nagow Wudjoo.

A description of the Grand Sable, or great sand-dunes of Lake
Superior, is given in Foster and Whitney's Report on the Geology of
the Lake Superior Land District, Part II. p. 131.

"The Grand Sable possesses a scenic interest little inferior to that
of the Pictured Rocks.  The explorer passes abruptly from a coast of
consolidated sand to one of loose materials; and although in the one
case the cliffs are less precipitous, yet in the other they attain a
higher altitude.  He sees before him a long reach of coast,
resembling a vast sand-bank, more than three hundred and fifty feet
in height, without a trace of vegetation.  Ascending to the top,
rounded hillocks of blown sand are observed, with occasional clumps
of trees standing out like oases in the desert."


Onaway! Awake, beloved!

The original of this song may be found in Littell's Living Age,
Vol. XXV. p. 45.


On the Red Swan floating, flying.

The fanciful tradition of the Red Swan may be found in Schoolcraft's
Algic Researches, Vol. II. p. 9.  Three brothers were hunting on a
wager to see who would bring home the first game.

"They were to shoot no other animal," so the legend says, "but such
as each was in the habit of killing.  They set out different ways:
Odjibwa, the youngest, had not gone far before he saw a bear, an
animal he was not to kill, by the agreement.  He followed him close,
and drove an arrow through him, which brought him to the ground.
Although contrary to the bet, he immediately commenced skinning him,
when suddenly something red tinged all the air around him.  He
rubbed his eyes, thinking he was perhaps deceived; but without
effect, for the red hue continued.  At length he heard a strange
noise at a distance.  It first appeared like a human voice, but
after following the sound for some distance, he reached the shores
of a lake, and soon saw the object he was looking for.  At a
distance out in the lake sat a most beautiful Red Swan, whose
plumage glittered in the sun, and who would now and then make the
same noise he had heard.  He was within long bow-shot, and, pulling
the arrow from the bowstring up to his ear, took deliberate aim and
shot.  The arrow took no effect; and he shot and shot again till his
quiver was empty.  Still the swan remained, moving round and round,
stretching its long neck and dipping its bill into the water, as if
heedless of the arrows shot at it.  Odjibwa ran home, and got all
his own and his brother's arrows and shot them all away.  He then
stood and gazed at the beautiful bird.  While standing, he
remembered his brother's saying that in their deceased father's
medicine-sack were three magic arrows.  Off he started, his anxiety
to kill the swan overcoming all scruples.  At any other time, he
would have deemed it sacrilege to open his father's medicine-sack;
but now he hastily seized the three arrows and ran back, leaving the
other contents of the sack scattered over the lodge.  The swan was
still there.  He shot the first arrow with great precision, and came
very near to it.  The second came still closer; as he took the last
arrow, he felt his arm firmer, and, drawing it up with vigor, saw it
pass through the neck of the swan a little above the breast.  Still
it did not prevent the bird from flying off, which it did, however,
at first slowly, flapping its wings and rising gradually into the
airs and teen flying off toward the sinking of the sun."
-- pp.10-12.


When I think of my beloved.

The original of this song may be found in Oneota, p. 15.


Sing the mysteries of Mondamin.
The Indians hold the maize, or Indian corn, in great veneration.

"They esteem it so important and divine a grain," says Schoolcraft,
"that their story-tellers invented various tales, in which this idea
is symbolized under the form of a special gift from the Great
Spirit.  The Odjibwa-Algonquins, who call it Mon-da-min, that is,
the Spirit's grain or berry, have a pretty story of this kind, in
which the stalk in full tassel is represented as descending from the
sky, under the guise of a handsome youth, in answer to the prayers
of a young man at his fast of virility, or coming to manhood.

"It is well known that corn-planting and corn-gathering, at least
among all the still uncolonized tribes, are left entirely to the
females and children, and a few superannuated old men.  It is not
generally known, perhaps, that this labor is not compulsory, and
that it is assumed by the females as a just equivalent, in their
view, for the onerous and continuous labor of the other sex, in
providing meats, and skins for clothing, by the chase, and in
defending their villages against their enemies, and keeping
intruders off their territories.  A good Indian housewife deems this
a part of her prerogative, and prides herself to have a store of
corn to exercise her hospitality, or duly honor her husband's
hospitality, in the entertainment of the lodge guests."
-- Oneota, p. 82.


Thus the fields shall be more fruitful.

"A singular proof of this belief, in both sexes, of the mysterious
influence of the steps of a woman on the vegetable and in sect
creation, is found in an ancient custom, which was related to me,
respecting corn-planting.  It was the practice of the hunter's wife,
when the field of corn had been planted, to choose the first dark or
overclouded evening to perform a secret circuit, sans habillement,
around the field.  For this purpose she slipped out of the lodge in
the evening, unobserved, to some obscure nook, where she completely
disrobed.  Then, taking her matchecota, or principal garment, in one
hand, she dragged it around the field.  This was thought to insure a
prolific crop, and to prevent the assaults of insects and worms upon
the grain.  It was supposed they could not creep over the charmed
line." -- Oneota, p. 83.


With his prisoner-string he bound him.

"These cords," says Mr. Tanner "are made of the bark of the elm-
tree, by boiling and then immersing it in cold water. . . .  The
leader of a war party commonly carries several fastened about his
waist, and if, in the course of the fight, any one of his young men
take a prisoner, it is his duty to bring him immediately to the
chief, to be tied, and the latter is responsible for his safe
keeping." -- Narrative of Captivity and Adventures, p. 412.


Wagemin, the thief of cornfields,
  Paimosaid, who steals the maize-ear.

"If one of the young female huskers finds a red ear of corn, it is
typical of a brave admirer, and is regarded as a fitting present to
some young warrior.  But if the ear be crooked, and tapering to a
point, no matter what color, the whole circle is set in a roar, and
wa-ge-min is the word shouted aloud.  It is the symbol of a thief in
the cornfield.  It is considered as the image of an old man stooping
as he enters the lot.  Had the chisel of Praxiteles been employed to
produce this image, it could not more vividly bring to the minds of
the merry group the idea of a pilferer of their favorite
mondamin. . . .

"The literal meaning of the term is, a mass, or crooked ear of
grain; but the ear of corn so called is a conventional type of a
little old man pilfering ears of corn in a cornfield.  It is in this
manner that a single word or term, in these curious languages,
becomes the fruitful parent of many ideas.  And we can thus perceive
why it is that the word wagemin is alone competent to excite
merriment in the husking circle.

"This term is taken as the basis of the cereal chorus, or corn song,
as sung by the Northern Algonquin tribes.  It is coupled with the
phrase Paimosaid,--a permutative form of the Indian substantive,
made from the verb pim-o-sa, to walk.  Its literal meaning is, he
who walks, or the walker; but the ideas conveyed by it are, he who
walks by night to pilfer corn.  It offers, therefore, a kind of
parallelism in expression to the preceding term." -- Oneota, p.
254.


Pugasaing, with thirteen pieces.

This Game of the Bowl is the principal game of hazard among the
Northern tribes of Indians.  Mr. Schoolcraft gives a particular
account of it in Oneota, p. 85.  "This game," he says, "is very
fascinating to some portions of the Indians.  They stake at it their
ornaments, weapons, clothing, canoes, horses, everything in fact
they possess; and have been known, it is said, to set up their wives
and children and even to forfeit their own liberty.  Of such
desperate stakes I have seen no examples, nor do I think the game
itself in common use.  It is rather confined to certain persons, who
hold the relative rank of gamblers in Indian society,--men who are
not noted as hunters or warriors, or steady providers for their
families.  Among these are persons who bear the term of Iena-dizze-
wug, that is, wanderers about the country, braggadocios, or fops.
It can hardly be classed with the popular games of amusement, by
which skill and dexterity are acquired.  I have generally found the
chiefs and graver men of the tribes, who encouraged the young men to
play ball, and are sure to be present at the customary sports, to
witness, and sanction, and applaud them, speak lightly and
disparagingly of this game of hazard.  Yet it cannot be denied that
some of the chiefs, distinguished in war and the chase, at the West,
can be referred to as lending their example to its fascinating  power."

See also his history, Condition, and Prospects of the Indian
Tribes, Part II, p. 72.


To the Pictured Rocks of sandstone.

The reader will find a long description of the Pictured Rocks in
Foster and Whitney's Report on the Geology of the Lake Superior Land
District, Part II. p. 124.  From this I make the following extract:--

"The Pictured Rocks may be described, in general terms, as a series
of sandstone bluffs extending along the shore of Lake Superior for
about five miles, and rising, in most places, vertically from the
water, without any beach at the base, to a height varying from fifty
to nearly two hundred feet.  Were they simply a line of cliffs, they
might not, so far as relates to height or extent, be worthy of a
rank among great natural curiosities, although such an assemblage of
rocky strata, washed by the waves of the great lake, would not,
under any circumstances, be destitute of grandeur.  To the voyager,
coasting along their base in his frail canoe, they would, at all
times, be an object of dread; the recoil of the surf, the rock-bound
coast, affording, for miles, no place of refuge,--the lowering sky,
the rising wind,--all these would excite his apprehension, and
induce him to ply a vigorous oar until the dreaded wall was passed.
But in the Pictured Rocks there are two features which communicate
to the scenery a wonderful and almost unique character.  These are,
first, the curious manner in which the cliffs have been excavated
and worn away by the action of the lake, which, for centuries, has
dashed an ocean-like surf against their base; and, second, the
equally curious manner in which large portions of the surface have
been colored by bands of brilliant hues.

"It is from the latter circumstance that the name, by which these
cliffs are known to the American traveller, is derived; while that
applied to them by the French voyageurs ('Les Portails') is derived
from the former, and by far the most striking peculiarity.

"The term Pictured Rocks has been in use for a great length of time;
but when it was first applied, we have been unable to discover.  It
would seem that the first travellers were more impressed with the
novel and striking distribution of colors on the surface than with
the astonishing variety of form into which the cliffs themselves
have been worn. . . .

"Our voyageurs had many legends to relate of the pranks of the
Menni-bojou in these caverns, and, in answer to our inquiries,
seemed disposed to fabricate stories, without end, of the
achievements of this Indian deity."


Toward the Sun his hands were lifted.

In this manner, and with such salutations, was Father Marquette
received by the Illinois.  See his Voyages et Decouvertes,
Section V.

<END HIAWATHA NOTES>


*************


THE COURTSHIP OF MILES STANDISH

I

MILES STANDISH

In the Old Colony days, in Plymouth the land of the Pilgrims,
To and fro in a room of his simple and primitive dwelling,
Clad in doublet and hose, and boots of Cordovan leather,
Strode, with a martial air, Miles Standish the Puritan Captain.
Buried in thought he seemed, with his hands behind him, and pausing
Ever and anon to behold his glittering weapons of warfare,
Hanging in shining array along the walls of the chamber,--
Cutlass and corselet of steel, and his trusty sword of Damascus,
Curved at the point and inscribed with its mystical Arabic sentence,
While underneath, in a corner, were fowling-piece, musket, and matchlock.
Short of stature he was, but strongly built and athletic,
Broad in the shoulders, deep-chested, with muscles and sinews of iron;
Brown as a nut was his face, but his russet beard was already
Flaked with patches of snow, as hedges sometimes in November.
Near him was seated John Alden, his friend, and household companion,
Writing with diligent speed at a table of pine by the window;
Fair-haired, azure-eyed, with delicate Saxon complexion,
Having the dew of his youth, and the beauty thereof, as the captives
Whom Saint Gregory saw, and exclaimed, "Not Angles, but Angels."
Youngest of all was he of the men who came in the Mayflower.

  Suddenly breaking the silence, the diligent scribe interrupting,
Spake, in the pride of his heart, Miles Standish the Captain of Plymouth.
"Look at these arms," he said, "the warlike weapons that hang here
Burnished and bright and clean, as if for parade or inspection!
This is the sword of Damascus I fought with in Flanders; this breastplate,
Well I remember the day! once saved my life in a skirmish;
Here in front you can see the very dint of the bullet
Fired point-blank at my heart by a Spanish arcabucero.
Had it not been of sheer steel, the forgotten bones of Miles Standish
Would at this moment be mould, in their grave in the Flemish morasses."
Thereupon answered John Alden, but looked not up from his writing:
"Truly the breath of the Lord hath slackened the speed of the bullet;
He in his mercy preserved you, to be our shield and our weapon!"
Still the Captain continued, unheeding the words of the stripling:
"See, how bright they are burnished, as if in an arsenal hanging;
That is because I have done it myself, and not left it to others.
Serve yourself, would you be well served, is an excellent adage;
So I take care of my arms, as you of your pens and your inkhorn.
Then, too, there are my soldiers, my great, invincible army,
Twelve men, all equipped, having each his rest and his matchlock,
Eighteen shillings a month, together with diet and pillage,
And, like Caesar, I know the name of each of my soldiers!"
This he said with a smile, that danced in his eyes, as the sunbeams
Dance on the waves of the sea, and vanish again in a moment.
Alden laughed as he wrote, and still the Captain continued:
"Look! you can see from this window my brazen howitzer planted
High on the roof of the church, a preacher who speaks to the purpose,
Steady, straight-forward, and strong, with irresistible logic,
Orthodox, flashing conviction right into the hearts of the heathen.
Now we are ready, I think, for any assault of the Indians;
Let them come, if they like, and the sooner they try it the better,--
Let them come if they like, be it sagamore, sachem, or pow-wow,
Aspinet, Samoset, Corbitant, Squanto, or Tokamahamon!"

  Long at the window he stood, and wistfully gazed on the landscape,
Washed with a cold gray mist, the vapory breath of the east-wind,
Forest and meadow and hill, and the steel-blue rim of the ocean,
Lying silent and sad, in the afternoon shadows and sunshine.
Over his countenance flitted a shadow like those on the landscape,
Gloom intermingled with light; and his voice was subdued with emotion,
Tenderness, pity, regret, as after a pause he proceeded:
"Yonder there, on the hill by the sea, lies buried Rose Standish;
Beautiful rose of love, that bloomed for me by the wayside!
She was the first to die of all who came in the Mayflower!
Green above her is growing the field of wheat we have sown there,
Better to hide from the Indian scouts the graves of our people,
Lest they should count them and see how many already have perished!"
Sadly his face he averted, and strode up and down, and was thoughtful.

  Fixed to the opposite wall was a shelf of books, and among them
Prominent three, distinguished alike for bulk and for binding;
Bariffe's Artillery Guide, and the Commentaries of Caesar,
Out of the Latin translated by Arthur Goldinge of London,
And, as if guarded by these, between them was standing the Bible.
Musing a moment before them, Miles Standish paused, as if doubtful
Which of the three he should choose for his consolation and comfort,
Whether the wars of the Hebrews, the famous campaigns of the Romans,
Or the Artillery practice, designed for belligerent Christians.
Finally down from its shelf he dragged the ponderous Roman,
Seated himself at the window, and opened the book, and in silence
Turned o'er the well-worn leaves, where thumb-marks thick on the margin,
Like the trample of feet, proclaimed the battle was hottest.
Nothing was heard in the room but the hurrying pen of the stripling,
Busily writing epistles important, to go by the Mayflower,
Ready to sail on the morrow, or next day at latest, God willing!
Homeward bound with the tidings of all that terrible winter,
Letters written by Alden, and full of the name of Priscilla,
Full of the name and the fame of the Puritan maiden Priscilla!



II

LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP

Nothing was heard in the room but the hurrying pen of the stripling,
Or an occasional sigh from the laboring heart of the Captain,
Reading the marvellous words and achievements of Julius Caesar.
After a while he exclaimed, as he smote with his hand, palm downwards,
Heavily on the page: "A wonderful man was this Caesar!
You are a writer, and I am a fighter, but here is a fellow
Who could both write and fight, and in both was equally skilful!"
Straightway answered and spake John Alden, the comely, the youthful:
"Yes, he was equally skilled, as you say, with his pen and his weapons.
Somewhere have I read, but where I forget, he could dictate
Seven letters at once, at the same time writing his memoirs."
"Truly," continued the Captain, not heeding or hearing the other,
"Truly a wonderful man was Caius Julius Caesar!
Better be first, he said, in a little Iberian village,
Than be second in Rome, and I think he was right when he said it.
Twice was he married before he was twenty, and many times after;
Battles five hundred he fought, and a thousand cities he conquered;
He, too, fought in Flanders, as he himself has recorded;
Finally he was stabbed by his friend, the orator Brutus!
Now, do you know what he did on a certain occasion in Flanders,
When the rear-guard of his army retreated, the front giving way too,
And the immortal Twelfth Legion was crowded so closely together
There was no room for their swords?  Why, he seized a shield from a soldier,
Put himself straight at the head of his troops, and commanded the captains,
Calling on each by his name, to order forward the ensigns;
Then to widen the ranks, and give more room for their weapons;
So he won the day, the battle of something-or-other.
That's what I always say; if you wish a thing to be well done,
You must do it yourself, you must not leave it to others!"

  All was silent again; the Captain continued his reading.
Nothing was heard in the room but the hurrying pen of the stripling
Writing epistles important to go next day by the Mayflower,
Filled with the name and the fame of the Puritan maiden Priscilla;
Every sentence began or closed with the name of Priscilla,
Till the treacherous pen, to which he confided the secret,
Strove to betray it by singing and shouting the name of Priscilla!
Finally closing his book, with a bang of the ponderous cover,
Sudden and loud as the sound of a soldier grounding his musket,
Thus to the young man spake Miles Standish the Captain of Plymouth:
"When you have finished your work, I have something important to tell you.
Be not however in haste; I can wait; I shall not be impatient!"
Straightway Alden replied, as he folded the last of his letters,
Pushing his papers aside, and giving respectful attention:
"Speak; for whenever you speak, I am always ready to listen,
Always ready to hear whatever pertains to Miles Standish."
Thereupon answered the Captain, embarrassed, and culling his phrases:
"'T is not good for a man to be alone, say the Scriptures.
This I have said before, and again and again I repeat it;
Every hour in the day, I think it, and feel it, and say it.
Since Rose Standish died, my life has been weary and dreary;
Sick at heart have I been, beyond the healing of friendship.
Oft in my lonely hours have I thought of the maiden Priscilla.
She is alone in the world; her father and mother and brother
Died in the winter together; I saw her going and coming,
Now to the grave of the dead, and now to the bed of the dying,
Patient, courageous, and strong, and said to myself, that if ever
There were angels on earth, as there are angels in heaven,
Two have I seen and known; and the angel whose name is Priscilla
Holds in my desolate life the place which the other abandoned.
Long have I cherished the thought, but never have dared to reveal it,
Being a coward in this, though valiant enough for the most part.
Go to the damsel Priscilla, the loveliest maiden of Plymouth,
Say that a blunt old Captain, a man not of words but of actions,
Offers his hand and his heart, the hand and heart of a soldier.
Not in these words, you know, but this in short is my meaning;
I am a maker of war, and not a maker of phrases.
You, who are bred as a scholar, can say it in elegant language,
Such as you read in your books of the pleadings and wooings of lovers,
Such as you think best adapted to win the heart of a maiden."

  When he had spoken, John Alden, the fair-haired, taciturn stripling,
All aghast at his words, surprised, embarrassed, bewildered,
Trying to mask his dismay by treating the subject with lightness,
Trying to smile, and yet feeling his heart stand still in his bosom,
Just as a timepiece stops in a house that is stricken by lightning,
Thus made answer and spake, or rather stammered than answered:
"Such a message as that, I am sure I should mangle and mar it;
If you would have it well done,--I am only repeating your maxim,--
You must do it yourself, you must not leave it to others!"
But with the air of a man whom nothing can turn from his purpose,
Gravely shaking his head, made answer the Captain of Plymouth:
"Truly the maxim is good, and I do not mean to gainsay it;
But we must use it discreetly, and not waste powder for nothing.
Now, as I said before, I was never a maker of phrases.
I can march up to a fortress and summon the place to surrender,
But march up to a woman with such a proposal, I dare not.
I'm not afraid of bullets, nor shot from the mouth of a cannon,
But of a thundering "No!" point-blank from the mouth of a woman,
That I confess I'm afraid of, nor am I ashamed to confess it!
So you must grant my request, for you are an elegant scholar,
Having the graces of speech, and skill in the turning of phrases."
Taking the hand of his friend, who still was reluctant and doubtful,
Holding it long in his own, and pressing it kindly, he added:
"Though I have spoken thus lightly, yet deep is the feeling that prompts me;
Surely you cannot refuse what I ask in the name of our friendship!"
Then made answer John Alden: "The name of friendship is sacred;
What you demand in that name, I have not the power to deny you!"
So the strong will prevailed, subduing and moulding the gentler,
Friendship prevailed over love, and Alden went on his errand.



III

THE LOVER'S ERRAND

So the strong will prevailed, and Alden went on his errand,
Out of the street of the village, and into the paths of the forest,
Into the tranquil woods, where blue-birds and robins were building
Towns in the populous trees, with hanging gardens of verdure,
Peaceful, aerial cities of joy and affection and freedom.
All around him was calm, but within him commotion and conflict,
Love contending with friendship, and self with each generous impulse.
To and fro in his breast his thoughts were heaving and dashing,
As in a foundering ship, with every roll of the vessel,
Washes the bitter sea, the merciless surge of the ocean!
"Must I relinquish it all," he cried with a wild lamentation,
"Must I relinquish it all, the joy, the hope, the illusion?
Was it for this I have loved, and waited, and worshipped in silence?
Was it for this I have followed the flying feet and the shadow
Over the wintry sea, to the desolate shores of New England?
Truly the heart is deceitful, and out of its depths of corruption
Rise, like an exhalation, the misty phantoms of passion;
Angels of light they seem, but are only delusions of Satan.
All is clear to me now; I feel it, I see it distinctly!
This is the hand of the Lord; it is laid upon me in anger,
For I have followed too much the heart's desires and devices,
Worshipping Astaroth blindly, and impious idols of Baal.
This is the cross I must bear; the sin and the swift retribution."

  So through the Plymouth woods John Alden went on his errand;
Crossing the brook at the ford, where it brawled over pebble and shallow,
Gathering still, as he went, the May-flowers blooming around him,
Fragrant, filling the air with a strange and wonderful sweetness,
Children lost in the woods, and covered with leaves in their slumber.
"Puritan flowers," he said, "and the type of Puritan maidens,
Modest and simple and sweet, the very type of Priscilla!
So I will take them to her; to Priscilla the May-flower of Plymouth,
Modest and simple and sweet, as a parting gift will I take them;
Breathing their silent farewells, as they fade and wither and perish,
Soon to be thrown away as is the heart of the giver."
So through the Plymouth woods John Alden went on his errand;
Came to an open space, and saw the disk of the ocean,
Sailless, sombre and cold with the comfortless breath of the east-wind;
Saw the new-built house and people at work in a meadow;
Heard, as he drew near the door, the musical voice of Priscilla
Singing the hundredth Psalm, the grand old Puritan anthem,
Music that Luther sang to the sacred words of the Psalmist,
Full of the breath of the Lord, consoling and comforting many.
Then, as he opened the door, he beheld the form of the maiden
Seated beside her wheel, and the carded wool like a snow-drift
Piled at her knee, her white hands feeding the ravenous spindle,
While with her foot on the treadle she guided the wheel in its motion.
Open wide on her lap lay the well-worn psalm-book of Ainsworth,
Printed in Amsterdam, the words and the music together,
Rough-hewn, angular notes, like stones in the wall of a churchyard,
Darkened and overhung by the running vine of the verses.
Such was the book from whose pages she sang the old Puritan anthem,
She, the Puritan girl, in the solitude of the forest,
Making the humble house and the modest apparel of home-spun
Beautiful with her beauty, and rich with the wealth of her being!
Over him rushed, like a wind that is keen and cold and relentless,
Thoughts of what might have been, and the weight and woe of his errand;
All the dreams that had faded, and all the hopes that had vanished,
All his life henceforth a dreary and tenantless mansion,
Haunted by vain regrets, and pallid, sorrowful faces.
Still he said to himself, and almost fiercely he said it,
"Let not him that putteth his hand to the plough look backwards;
Though the ploughshare cut through the flowers of life to its fountains,
Though it pass o'er the graves of the dead and the hearths of the living,
It is the will of the Lord; and his mercy endureth for ever!"

  So he entered the house: and the hum of the wheel and the singing
Suddenly ceased; for Priscilla, aroused by his step on the threshold,
Rose as he entered, and gave him her hand, in signal of welcome,
Saying, "I knew it was you, when I heard your step in the passage;
For I was thinking of you, as I sat there singing and spinning."
Awkward and dumb with delight, that a thought of him had been mingled
Thus in the sacred psalm, that came from the heart of the maiden,
Silent before her he stood, and gave her the flowers for an answer,
Finding no words for his thought.  He remembered that day in the winter,
After the first great snow, when he broke a path from the village,
Reeling and plunging along through the drifts that encumbered the doorway,
Stamping the snow from his feet as he entered the house, and Priscilla
Laughed at his snowy locks, and gave him a seat by the fireside,
Grateful and pleased to know he had thought of her in the snow-storm.
Had he but spoken then! perhaps not in vain had he spoken;
Now it was all too late; the golden moment had vanished!
So he stood there abashed, and gave her the flowers for an answer.

  Then they sat down and talked of the birds and the beautiful Spring-time,
Talked of their friends at home, and the Mayflower that sailed on the morrow.
"I have been thinking all day," said gently the Puritan maiden,
"Dreaming all night, and thinking all day, of the hedge-rows of England,--
They are in blossom now, and the country is all like a garden;
Thinking of lanes and fields, and the song of the lark and the linnet,
Seeing the village street, and familiar faces of neighbors
Going about as of old, and stopping to gossip together,
And, at the end of the street, the village church, with the ivy
Climbing the old gray tower, and the quiet graves in the churchyard.
Kind are the people I live with, and dear to me my religion;
Still my heart is so sad, that I wish myself back in Old England.
You will say it is wrong, but I cannot help it: I almost
Wish myself back in Old England, I feel so lonely and wretched."

  Thereupon answered the youth:--"Indeed I do not condemn you;
Stouter hearts than a woman's have quailed in this terrible winter.
Yours is tender and trusting, and needs a stronger to lean on;
So I have come to you now, with an offer and proffer of marriage
Made by a good man and true, Miles Standish the Captain of Plymouth!"

  Thus he delivered his message, the dexterous writer of letters,--
Did not embellish the theme, nor array it in beautiful phrases,
But came straight to the point, and blurted it out like a schoolboy;
Even the Captain himself could hardly have said it more bluntly.
Mute with amazement and sorrow, Priscilla the Puritan maiden
Looked into Alden's face, her eyes dilated with wonder,
Feeling his words like a blow, that stunned her and rendered her speechless;
Till at length she exclaimed, interrupting the ominous silence:
"If the great Captain of Plymouth is so very eager to wed me,
Why does he not come himself, and take the trouble to woo me?
If I am not worth the wooing, I surely am not worth the winning!"
Then John Alden began explaining and smoothing the matter,
Making it worse as he went, by saying the Captain was busy,--
Had no time for such things;--such things! the words grating harshly
Fell on the ear of Priscilla; and swift as a flash she made answer:
"Has he no time for such things, as you call it, before he is married,
Would he be likely to find it, or make it, after the wedding?
That is the way with you men; you don't understand us, you cannot.
When you have made up your minds, after thinking of this one and that one,
Choosing, selecting, rejecting, comparing one with another,
Then you make known your desire, with abrupt and sudden avowal,
And are offended and hurt, and indignant perhaps, that a woman
Does not respond at once to a love that she never suspected,
Does not attain at a bound the height to which you have been climbing.
This is not right nor just: for surely a woman's affection
Is not a thing to be asked for, and had for only the asking.
When one is truly in love, one not only says it, but shows it.
Had he but waited awhile, had he only showed that he loved me,
Even this Captain of yours--who knows?--at last might have won me,
Old and rough as he is; but now it never can happen."

  Still John Alden went on, unheeding the words of Priscilla,
Urging the suit of his friend, explaining, persuading, expanding;
Spoke of his courage and skill, and of all his battles in Flanders,
How with the people of God he had chosen to suffer affliction,
How, in return for his zeal, they had made him Captain of Plymouth;
He was a gentleman born, could trace his pedigree plainly
Back to Hugh Standish of Duxbury Hall, in Lancashire, England,
Who was the son of Ralph, and the grandson of Thurston de Standish;
Heir unto vast estates, of which he was basely defrauded,
Still bore the family arms, and had for his crest a cock argent
Combed and wattled gules, and all the rest of the blazon.
He was a man of honor, of noble and generous nature;
Though he was rough, he was kindly; she knew how during the winter
He had attended the sick, with a hand as gentle as woman's;
Somewhat hasty and hot, he could not deny it, and headstrong,
Stern as a soldier might be, but hearty, and placable always,
Not to be laughed at and scorned, because he was little of stature;
For he was great of heart, magnanimous, courtly, courageous;
Any woman in Plymouth, nay, any woman in England,
Might be happy and proud to be called the wife of Miles Standish!

  But as he warmed and glowed, in his simple and eloquent language,
Quite forgetful of self, and full of the praise of his rival,
Archly the maiden smiled, and, with eyes over-running with laughter,
Said, in a tremulous voice, "Why don't you speak for yourself, John?"



IV

JOHN ALDEN

Into the open air John Alden, perplexed and bewildered,
Rushed like a man insane, and wandered alone by the sea-side;
Paced up and down the sands, and bared his head to the east-wind,
Cooling his heated brow, and the fire and fever within him.
Slowly as out of the heavens, with apocalyptical splendors,
Sank the City of God, in the vision of John the Apostle,
So, with its cloudy walls of chrysolite, jasper, and sapphire,
Sank the broad red sun, and over its turrets uplifted
Glimmered the golden reed of the angel who measured the city.

  "Welcome, O wind of the East!" he exclaimed in his wild exultation,
"Welcome, O wind of the East, from the caves of the misty Atlantic!
Blowing o'er fields of dulse, and measureless meadows of sea-grass,
Blowing o'er rocky wastes, and the grottos and gardens of ocean!
Lay thy cold, moist hand on my burning forehead, and wrap me
Close in thy garments of mist, to allay the fever within me!"

  Like an awakened conscience, the sea was moaning and tossing,
Beating remorseful and loud the mutable sands of the sea-shore.
Fierce in his soul was the struggle and tumult of passions contending;
Love triumphant and crowned, and friendship wounded and bleeding,
Passionate cries of desire, and importunate pleadings of duty!
"Is it my fault," he said, "that the maiden has chosen between us?
Is it my fault that he failed,--my fault that I am the victor?"
Then within him there thundered a voice, like the voice of the Prophet:
"It hath displeased the Lord!"--and he thought of David's transgression,
Bathsheba's beautiful face, and his friend in the front of the battle!
Shame and confusion of guilt, and abasement and self-condemnation,
Overwhelmed him at once; and he cried in the deepest contrition:
"It hath displeased the Lord!  It is the temptation of Satan!"

  Then, uplifting his head, he looked at the sea, and beheld there
Dimly the shadowy form of the Mayflower riding at anchor,
Rocked on the rising tide, and ready to sail on the morrow;
Heard the voices of men through the mist, the rattle of cordage
Thrown on the deck, the shouts of the mate, and the sailors' "Ay, ay, Sir!"
Clear and distinct, but not loud, in the dripping air of the twilight.
Still for a moment he stood, and listened, and stared at the vessel,
Then went hurriedly on, as one who, seeing a phantom,
Stops, then quickens his pace, and follows the beckoning shadow.
"Yes, it is plain to me now," he murmured; "the hand of the Lord is
Leading me out of the land of darkness, the bondage of error,
Through the sea, that shall lift the walls of its waters around me,
Hiding me, cutting me off, from the cruel thoughts that pursue me.
Back will I go o'er the ocean, this dreary land will abandon,
Her whom I may not love, and him whom my heart has offended.
Better to be in my grave in the green old churchyard in England,
Close by my mother's side, and among the dust of my kindred;
Better be dead and forgotten, than living in shame and dishonor!
Sacred and safe and unseen, in the dark of the narrow chamber
With me my secret shall lie, like a buried jewel that glimmers
Bright on the hand that is dust, in the chambers of silence and darkness,--
Yes, as the marriage ring of the great espousal hereafter!"

  Thus as he spake, he turned, in the strength of his strong resolution,
Leaving behind him the shore, and hurried along in the twilight,
Through the congenial gloom of the forest silent and sombre,
Till he beheld the lights in the seven houses of Plymouth,
Shining like seven stars in the dusk and mist of the evening.
Soon he entered his door, and found the redoubtable Captain
Sitting alone, and absorbed in the martial pages of Caesar,
Fighting some great campaign in Hainault or Brabant or Flanders.
"Long have you been on your errand," he said with a cheery demeanor,
Even as one who is waiting an answer, and fears not the issue.
"Not far off is the house, although the woods are between us;
But you have lingered so long, that while you were going and coming
I have fought ten battles and sacked and demolished a city.
Come, sit down, and in order relate to me all that has happened."

  Then John Alden spake, and related the wondrous adventure,
From beginning to end, minutely, just as it happened;
How he had seen Priscilla, and how he had sped in his courtship,
Only smoothing a little, and softening down her refusal.
But when he came at length to the words Priscilla had spoken,
Words so tender and cruel: "Why don't you speak for yourself, John?"
Up leaped the Captain of Plymouth, and stamped on the floor, till his armor
Clanged on the wall, where it hung, with a sound of sinister omen.
All his pent-up wrath burst forth in a sudden explosion,
Even as a hand-grenade, that scatters destruction around it.
Wildly he shouted, and loud: "John Alden! you have betrayed me!
Me, Miles Standish, your friend! have supplanted, defrauded, betrayed me!
One of my ancestors ran his sword through the heart of Wat Tyler;
Who shall prevent me from running my own through the heart of a traitor?
Yours is the greater treason, for yours is a treason to friendship!
You, who lived under my roof, whom I cherished and loved as a brother;
You, who have fed at my board, and drunk at my cup, to whose keeping
I have intrusted my honor, my thoughts the most sacred and secret,--
You too, Brutus! ah woe to the name of friendship hereafter!
Brutus was Caesar's friend, and you were mine, but henceforward
Let there be nothing between us save war, and implacable hatred!"

  So spake the Captain of Plymouth, and strode about in the chamber,
Chafing and choking with rage; like cords were the veins on his temples.
But in the midst of his anger a man appeared at the doorway,
Bringing in uttermost haste a message of urgent importance,
Rumors of danger and war and hostile incursions of Indians!
Straightway the Captain paused, and, without further question or parley,
Took from the nail on the wall his sword with its scabbard of iron,
Buckled the belt round his waist, and, frowning fiercely, departed.
Alden was left alone.  He heard the clank of the scabbard
Growing fainter and fainter, and dying away in the distance.
Then he arose from his seat, and looked forth into the darkness,
Felt the cool air blow on his cheek, that was hot with the insult,
Lifted his eyes to the heavens, and, folding his hands as in childhood,
Prayed in the silence of night to the Father who seeth in secret.

  Meanwhile the choleric Captain strode wrathful away to the council,
Found it already assembled, impatiently waiting his coming;
Men in the middle of life, austere and grave in deportment,
Only one of them old, the hill that was nearest to heaven,
Covered with snow, but erect, the excellent Elder of Plymouth.
God had sifted three kingdoms to find the wheat for this planting,
Then had sifted the wheat, as the living seed of a nation;
So say the chronicles old, and such is the faith of the people!
Near them was standing an Indian, in attitude stern and defiant,
Naked down to the waist, and grim and ferocious in aspect;
While on the table before them was lying unopened a Bible,
Ponderous, bound in leather, brass-studded, printed in Holland,
And beside it outstretched the skin of a rattle-snake glittered,
Filled, like a quiver, with arrows; a signal and challenge of warfare,
Brought by the Indian, and speaking with arrowy tongues of defiance.
This Miles Standish beheld, as he entered, and heard them debating
What were an answer befitting the hostile message and menace,
Talking of this and of that, contriving, suggesting, objecting;
One voice only for peace, and that the voice of the Elder,
Judging it wise and well that some at least were converted,
Rather than any were slain, for this was but Christian behavior!
Then out spake Miles Standish, the stalwart Captain of Plymouth,
Muttering deep in his throat, for his voice was husky with anger,
"What! do you mean to make war with milk and the water of roses?
Is it to shoot red squirrels you have your howitzer planted
There on the roof of the church, or is it to shoot red devils?
Truly the only tongue that is understood by a savage
Must be the tongue of fire that speaks from the mouth of the cannon!"
Thereupon answered and said the excellent Elder of Plymouth,
Somewhat amazed and alarmed at this irreverent language:
"Not so thought Saint Paul, nor yet the other Apostles;
Not from the cannon's mouth were the tongues of fire they spake with!"
But unheeded fell this mild rebuke on the Captain,
Who had advanced to the table, and thus continued discoursing:
"Leave this matter to me, for to me by right it pertaineth.
War is a terrible trade; but in the cause that is righteous,
Sweet is the smell of powder; and thus I answer the challenge!"

  Then from the rattlesnake's skin, with a sudden, contemptuous gesture,
Jerking the Indian arrows, he filled it with powder and bullets
Full to the very jaws, and handed it back to the savage,
Saying, in thundering tones: "Here, take it! this is your answer!"
Silently out of the room then glided the glistening savage,
Bearing the serpent's skin, and seeming himself like a serpent,
Winding his sinuous way in the dark to the depths of the forest.



V

THE SAILING OF THE MAYFLOWER

Just in the gray of the dawn, as the mists uprose from the meadows,
There was a stir and a sound in the slumbering village of Plymouth;
Clanging and clicking of arms, and the order imperative, "Forward!"
Given in tone suppressed, a tramp of feet, and then silence.
Figures ten, in the mist, marched slowly out of the village.
Standish the stalwart it was, with eight of his valorous army,
Led by their Indian guide, by Hobomok, friend of the white men,
Northward marching to quell the sudden revolt of the savage.
Giants they seemed in the mist, or the mighty men of King David;
Giants in heart they were, who believed in God and the Bible,--
Ay, who believed in the smiting of Midianites and Philistines.
Over them gleamed far off the crimson banners of morning;
Under them loud on the sands, the serried billows, advancing,
Fired along the line, and in regular order retreated.

  Many a mile had they marched, when at length the village of Plymouth
Woke from its sleep, and arose, intent on its manifold labors.
Sweet was the air and soft; and slowly the smoke from the chimneys
Rose over roofs of thatch, and pointed steadily eastward;
Men came forth from the doors, and paused and talked of the weather,
Said that the wind had changed, and was blowing fair for the Mayflower;
Talked of their Captain's departure, and all the dangers that menaced,
He being gone, the town, and what should be done in his absence.
Merrily sang the birds, and the tender voices of women
Consecrated with hymns the common cares of the household.
Out of the sea rose the sun, and the billows rejoiced at his coming;
Beautiful were his feet on the purple tops of the mountains;
Beautiful on the sails of the Mayflower riding at anchor,
Battered and blackened and worn by all the storms of the winter.
Loosely against her masts was hanging and flapping her canvas,
Rent by so many gales, and patched by the hands of the sailors.
Suddenly from her side, as the sun rose over the ocean,
Darted a puff of smoke, and floated seaward; anon rang
Loud over field and forest the cannon's roar, and the echoes
Heard and repeated the sound, the signal-gun of departure!
Ah! but with louder echoes replied the hearts of the people!
Meekly, in voices subdued, the chapter was read from the Bible,
Meekly the prayer was begun, but ended in fervent entreaty!
Then from their houses in haste came forth the Pilgrims of Plymouth,
Men and women and children, all hurrying down to the sea-shore,
Eager, with tearful eyes, to say farewell to the Mayflower,
Homeward bound o'er the sea, and leaving them here in the desert.

  Foremost among them was Alden.  All night he had lain without slumber,
Turning and tossing about in the heat and unrest of his fever.
He had beheld Miles Standish, who came back late from the council,
Stalking into the room, and heard him mutter and murmur,
Sometimes it seemed a prayer, and sometimes it sounded like swearing.
Once he had come to the bed, and stood there a moment in silence;
Then he had turned away, and said: "I will not awake him;
Let him sleep on, it is best; for what is the use of more talking!"
Then he extinguished the light, and threw himself down on his pallet,
Dressed as he was, and ready to start at the break of the morning,--
Covered himself with the cloak he had worn in his campaigns in Flanders,--
Slept as a soldier sleeps in his bivouac, ready for action.
But with the dawn he arose; in the twilight Alden beheld him
Put on his corselet of steel, and all the rest of his armor,
Buckle about his waist his trusty blade of Damascus,
Take from the corner his musket, and so stride out of the chamber.
Often the heart of the youth had burned and yearned to embrace him,
Often his lips had essayed to speak, imploring for pardon;
All the old friendship came back, with its tender and grateful emotions;
But his pride overmastered the nobler nature within him,--
Pride, and the sense of his wrong, and the burning fire of the insult.
So he beheld his friend departing in anger, but spake not,
Saw him go forth to danger, perhaps to death, and he spake not!
Then he arose from his bed, and heard what the people were saying,
Joined in the talk at the door, with Stephen and Richard and Gilbert,
Joined in the morning prayer, and in the reading of Scripture,
And, with the others, in haste went hurrying down to the sea-shore,
Down to the Plymouth Rock, that had been to their feet as a door-step
Into a world unknown,--the corner-stone of a nation!

  There with his boat was the Master, already a little impatient
Lest he should lose the tide, or the wind might shift to the eastward,
Square-built, hearty, and strong, with an odor of ocean about him,
Speaking with this one and that, and cramming letters and parcels
Into his pockets capacious, and messages mingled together
Into his narrow brain, till at last he was wholly bewildered.
Nearer the boat stood Alden, with one foot placed on the gunwale,
One still firm on the rock, and talking at times with the sailors,
Seated erect on the thwarts, all ready and eager for starting.
He too was eager to go, and thus put an end to his anguish,
Thinking to fly from despair, that swifter than keel is or canvas,
Thinking to drown in the sea the ghost that would rise and pursue him.
But as he gazed on the crowd, he beheld the form of Priscilla
Standing dejected among them, unconscious of all that was passing.
Fixed were her eyes upon his, as if she divined his intention,
Fixed with a look so sad, so reproachful, imploring, and patient,
That with a sudden revulsion his heart recoiled from its purpose,
As from the verge of a crag, where one step more is destruction.
Strange is the heart of man, with its quick, mysterious instincts!
Strange is the life of man, and fatal or fated are moments,
Whereupon turn, as on hinges, the gates of the wall adamantine!
"Here I remain!" he exclaimed, as he looked at the heavens above him,
Thanking the Lord whose breath had scattered the mist and the madness,
Wherein, blind and lost, to death he was staggering headlong.
"Yonder snow-white cloud, that floats in the ether above me,
Seems like a hand that is pointing and beckoning over the ocean.
There is another hand, that is not so spectral and ghost-like,
Holding me, drawing me back, and clasping mine for protection.
Float, O hand of cloud, and vanish away in the ether!
Roll thyself up like a fist, to threaten and daunt me; I heed not
Either your warning or menace, or any omen of evil!
There is no land so sacred, no air so pure and so wholesome,
As is the air she breathes, and the soil that is pressed by her footsteps.
Here for her sake will I stay, and like an invisible presence
Hover around her for ever, protecting, supporting her weakness;
Yes! as my foot was the first that stepped on this rock at the landing,
So, with the blessing of God, shall it be the last at the leaving!"

  Meanwhile the Master alert, but with dignified air and important,
Scanning with watchful eye the tide and the wind and the weather,
Walked about on the sands; and the people crowded around him
Saying a few last words, and enforcing his careful remembrance.
Then, taking each by the hand, as if he were grasping a tiller,
Into the boat he sprang, and in haste shoved off to his vessel,
Glad in his heart to get rid of all this worry and flurry,
Glad to be gone from a land of sand and sickness and sorrow,
Short allowance of victual, and plenty of nothing but Gospel!
Lost in the sound of the oars was the last farewell of the Pilgrims.
O strong hearts and true! not one went back in the Mayflower!
No, not one looked back, who had set his hand to this ploughing!

  Soon were heard on board the shouts and songs of the sailors
Heaving the windlass round, and hoisting the ponderous anchor.
Then the yards were braced, and all sails set to the west-wind,
Blowing steady and strong; and the Mayflower sailed from the harbor,
Rounded the point of the Gurnet, and leaving far to the southward
Island and cape of sand, and the Field of the First Encounter,
Took the wind on her quarter, and stood for the open Atlantic,
Borne on the send of the sea, and the swelling hearts of the Pilgrims.

  Long in silence they watched the receding sail of the vessel,
Much endeared to them all, as something living and human;
Then, as if filled with the spirit, and wrapt in a vision prophetic,
Baring his hoary head, the excellent Elder of Plymouth
Said, "Let us pray!" and they prayed, and thanked the Lord and took courage.
Mournfully sobbed the waves at the base of the rock, and above them
Bowed and whispered the wheat on the hill of death, and their kindred
Seemed to awake in their graves, and to join in the prayer that they uttered.
Sun-illumined and white, on the eastern verge of the ocean
Gleamed the departing sail, like a marble slab in a graveyard;
Buried beneath it lay for ever all hope of escaping.
Lo! as they turned to depart, they saw the form of an Indian,
Watching them from the hill; but while they spake with each other,
Pointing with outstretched hands, and saying, "Look!" he had vanished.
So they returned to their homes; but Alden lingered a little,
Musing alone on the shore, and watching the wash of the billows
Round the base of the rock, and the sparkle and flash of the sunshine,
Like the spirit of God, moving visibly over the waters.



VI

PRISCILLA

Thus for a while he stood, and mused by the shore of the ocean,
Thinking of many things, and most of all of Priscilla;
And as if thought had the power to draw to itself, like the loadstone,
Whatsoever it touches, by subtile laws of its nature,
Lo! as he turned to depart, Priscilla was standing beside him.

  "Are you so much offended, you will not speak to me?" said she.
"Am I so much to blame, that yesterday, when you were pleading
Warmly the cause of another, my heart, impulsive and wayward,
Pleaded your own, and spake out, forgetful perhaps of decorum?
Certainly you can forgive me for speaking so frankly, for saying
What I ought not to have said, yet now I can never unsay it;
For there are moments in life, when the heart is so full of emotion,
That if by chance it be shaken, or into its depths like a pebble
Drops some careless word, it overflows, and its secret,
Spilt on the ground like water, can never be gathered together.
Yesterday I was shocked, when I heard you speak of Miles Standish,
Praising his virtues, transforming his very defects into virtues,
Praising his courage and strength, and even his fighting in Flanders,
As if by fighting alone you could win the heart of a woman,
Quite overlooking yourself and the rest, in exalting your hero.
Therefore I spake as I did, by an irresistible impulse.
You will forgive me, I hope, for the sake of the friendship between us,
Which is too true and too sacred to be so easily broken!"
Thereupon answered John Alden, the scholar, the friend of Miles Standish:
"I was not angry with you, with myself alone I was angry,
Seeing how badly I managed the matter I had in my keeping."
"No!" interrupted the maiden, with answer prompt and decisive;
"No; you were angry with me, for speaking so frankly and freely.
It was wrong, I acknowledge; for it is the fate of a woman
Long to be patient and silent, to wait like a ghost that is speechless,
Till some questioning voice dissolves the spell of its silence.
Hence is the inner life of so many suffering women
Sunless and silent and deep, like subterranean rivers
Running through caverns of darkness, unheard, unseen, and unfruitful,
Chafing their channels of stone, with endless and profitless murmurs."
Thereupon answered John Alden, the young man, the lover of women:
"Heaven forbid it, Priscilla; and truly they seem to me always
More like the beautiful rivers that watered the garden of Eden,
More like the river Euphrates, through deserts of Havilah flowing,
Filling the land with delight, and memories sweet of the garden!"
"Ah, by these words, I can see," again interrupted the maiden,
"How very little you prize me, or care for what I am saying.
When from the depths of my heart, in pain and with secret misgiving,
Frankly I speak to you, asking for sympathy only and kindness,
Straightway you take up my words, that are plain and direct and in earnest,
Turn them away from their meaning, and answer with flattering phrases.
This is not right, is not just, is not true to the best that is in you;
For I know and esteem you, and feel that your nature is noble,
Lifting mine up to a higher, a more ethereal level.
Therefore I value your friendship, and feel it perhaps the more keenly
If you say aught that implies I am only as one among many,
If you make use of those common and complimentary phrases
Most men think so fine, in dealing and speaking with women,
But which women reject as insipid, if not as insulting."

  Mute and amazed was Alden; and listened and looked at Priscilla,
Thinking he never had seen her more fair, more divine in her beauty.
He who but yesterday pleaded so glibly the cause of another,
Stood there embarrassed and silent, and seeking in vain for an answer.
So the maiden went on, and little divined or imagined
What was at work in his heart, that made him so awkward and speechless.
"Let us, then, be what we are, and speak what we think, and in all things
Keep ourselves loyal to truth, and the sacred professions of friendship.
It is no secret I tell you, nor am I ashamed to declare it:
I have liked to be with you, to see you, to speak with you always.
So I was hurt at your words, and a little affronted to hear you
Urge me to marry your friend, though he were the Captain Miles Standish.
For I must tell you the truth: much more to me is your friendship
Than all the love he could give, were he twice the hero you think him."
Then she extended her hand, and Alden, who eagerly grasped it,
Felt all the wounds in his heart, that were aching and bleeding so sorely,
Healed by the touch of that hand, and he said, with a voice full of feeling:
"Yes, we must ever be friends; and of all who offer you friendship
Let me be ever the first, the truest, the nearest and dearest!"

  Casting a farewell look at the glimmering sail of the Mayflower,
Distant, but still in sight, and sinking below the horizon,
Homeward together they walked, with a strange, indefinite feeling,
That all the rest had departed and left them alone in the desert.
But, as they went through the fields in the blessing and smile of the sunshine,
Lighter grew their hearts, and Priscilla said very archly:
"Now that our terrible Captain has gone in pursuit of the Indians,
Where he is happier far than he would be commanding a household,
You may speak boldly, and tell me of all that happened between you,
When you returned last night, and said how ungrateful you found me."
Thereupon answered John Alden, and told her the whole of the story,--
Told her his own despair, and the direful wrath of Miles Standish.
Whereat the maiden smiled, and said between laughing and earnest,
"He is a little chimney, and heated hot in a moment!"
But as he gently rebuked her, and told her how much he had suffered,--
How he had even determined to sail that day in the Mayflower,
And had remained for her sake, on hearing the dangers that threatened,--
All her manner was changed, and she said with a faltering accent,
"Truly I thank you for this: how good you have been to me always!"

  Thus, as a pilgrim devout, who toward Jerusalem journeys,
Taking three steps in advance, and one reluctantly backward,
Urged by importunate zeal, and withheld by pangs of contrition;
Slowly but steadily onward, receding yet ever advancing,
Journeyed this Puritan youth to the Holy Land of his longings,
Urged by the fervor of love, and withheld by remorseful misgivings.



VII

THE MARCH OF MILES STANDISH

Meanwhile the stalwart Miles Standish was marching steadily northward,
Winding through forest and swamp, and along the trend of the sea-shore,
All day long, with hardly a halt, the fire of his anger
Burning and crackling within, and the sulphurous odor of powder
Seeming more sweet to his nostrils than all the scents of the forest.
Silent and moody he went, and much he revolved his discomfort;
He who was used to success, and to easy victories always,
Thus to be flouted, rejected, and laughed to scorn by a maiden,
Thus to be mocked and betrayed by the friend whom most he had trusted!
Ah! 't was too much to be borne, and he fretted and chafed in his armor!

  "I alone am to blame," he muttered, "for mine was the folly.
What has a rough old soldier, grown grim and gray in the harness,
Used to the camp and its ways, to do with the wooing of maidens?
'T was but a dream,--let it pass,--let it vanish like so many others!
What I thought was a flower, is only a weed, and is worthless;
Out of my heart will I pluck it, and throw it away, and henceforward
Be but a fighter of battles, a lover and wooer of dangers!"
Thus he revolved in his mind his sorry defeat and discomfort,
While he was marching by day or lying at night in the forest,
Looking up at the trees, and the constellations beyond them.

  After a three days' march he came to an Indian encampment
Pitched on the edge of a meadow, between the sea and the forest;
Women at work by the tents, and the warriors, horrid with war-paint,
Seated about a fire, and smoking and talking together;
Who, when they saw from afar the sudden approach of the white men,
Saw the flash of the sun on breastplate and sabre and musket,
Straightway leaped to their feet, and two, from among them advancing,
Came to parley with Standish, and offer him furs as a present;
Friendship was in their looks, but in their hearts there was hatred.
Braves of the tribe were these, and brothers gigantic in stature,
Huge as Goliath of Gath, or the terrible Og, king of Bashan;
One was Pecksuot named, and the other was called Wattawamat.
Round their necks were suspended their knives in scabbards of wampum,
Two-edged, trenchant knives, with points as sharp as a needle.
Other arms had they none, for they were cunning and crafty.
"Welcome, English!" they said,--these words they had learned from the traders
Touching at times on the coast, to barter and chaffer for peltries.
Then in their native tongue they began to parley with Standish,
Through his guide and interpreter Hobomok, friend of the white man,
Begging for blankets and knives, but mostly for muskets and powder,
Kept by the white man, they said, concealed, with the plague, in his cellars,
Ready to be let loose, and destroy his brother the red man!
But when Standish refused, and said he would give them the Bible,

Suddenly changing their tone, they began to boast and to bluster.
Then Wattawamat advanced with a stride in front of the other,
And, with a lofty demeanor, thus vauntingly spake to the Captain:
"Now Wattawamat can see, by the fiery eyes of the Captain,
Angry is he in his heart; but the heart of the brave Wattawamat
Is not afraid at the sight.  He was not born of a woman,
But on a mountain, at night, from an oak-tree riven by lightning,
Forth he sprang at a bound, with all his weapons about him,
Shouting, 'Who is there here to fight with the brave Wattawamat?'"
Then he unsheathed his knife, and, whetting the blade on his left hand,
Held it aloft and displayed a woman's face on the handle,
Saying, with bitter expression and look of sinister meaning:
"I have another at home, with the face of a man on the handle;
By and by they shall marry; and there will be plenty of children!"

  Then stood Pecksuot forth, self-vaunting, insulting Miles Standish:
While with his fingers he petted the knife that hung at his bosom,
Drawing it half from its sheath, and plunging it back, as he muttered,
"By and by it shall see; it shall eat; ah, ha! but shall speak not!
This is the mighty Captain the white men have sent to destroy us!
He is a little man; let him go and work with the women!"

  Meanwhile Standish had noted the faces and figures of Indians
Peeping and creeping about from bush to tree in the forest,
Feigning to look for game, with arrows set on their bow-strings,
Drawing about him still closer and closer the net of their ambush.
But undaunted he stood, and dissembled and treated them smoothly;
So the old chronicles say, that were writ in the days of the fathers.
But when he heard their defiance, the boast, the taunt, and the insult,
All the hot blood of his race, of Sir Hugh and of Thurston de Standish,
Boiled and beat in his heart, and swelled in the veins of his temples.
Headlong he leaped on the boaster, and, snatching his knife from its scabbard,
Plunged it into his heart, and, reeling backward, the savage
Fell with his face to the sky, and a fiendlike fierceness upon it.
Straight there arose from the forest the awful sound of the war-whoop,
And, like a flurry of snow on the whistling wind of December,
Swift and sudden and keen came a flight of feathery arrows,
Then came a cloud of smoke, and out of the cloud came the lightning,
Out of the lightning thunder, and death unseen ran before it.
Frightened the savages fled for shelter in swamp and in thicket,
Hotly pursued and beset; but their sachem, the brave Wattawamat,
Fled not; he was dead.  Unswerving and swift had a bullet
Passed through his brain, and he fell with both hands clutching the greensward,
Seeming in death to hold back from his foe the land of his fathers.

  There on the flowers of the meadow the warriors lay, and above them,
Silent, with folded arms, stood Hobomok, friend of the white man.
Smiling at length he exclaimed to the stalwart Captain of Plymouth:
"Pecksuot bragged very loud, of his courage, his strength, and his stature,--
Mocked the great Captain, and called him a little man; but I see now
Big enough have you been to lay him speechless before you!"

  Thus the first battle was fought and won by the stalwart Miles Standish.
When the tidings thereof were brought to the village of Plymouth,
And as a trophy of war the head of the brave Wattawamat
Scowled from the roof of the fort, which at once was a church and a fortress,
All who beheld it rejoiced, and praised the Lord, and took courage.
Only Priscilla averted her face from this spectre of terror,
Thanking God in her heart that she had not married Miles Standish;
Shrinking, fearing almost, lest, coming home from his battles,
He should lay claim to her hand, as the prize and reward of his valor.



VIII

THE SPINNING-WHEEL

Month after month passed away, and in Autumn the ships of the merchants
Came with kindred and friends, with cattle and corn for the Pilgrims.
All in the village was peace; the men were intent on their labors,
Busy with hewing and building, with garden-plot and with merestead,
Busy with breaking the glebe, and mowing the grass in the meadows,
Searching the sea for its fish, and hunting the deer in the forest.
All in the village was peace; but at times the rumor of warfare
Filled the air with alarm, and the apprehension of danger.
Bravely the stalwart Miles Standish was scouring the land with his forces,
Waxing valiant in fight and defeating the alien armies,
Till his name had become a sound of fear to the nations.
Anger was still in his heart, but at times the remorse and contrition
Which in all noble natures succeed the passionate outbreak,
Came like a rising tide, that encounters the rush of a river,
Staying its current awhile, but making it bitter and brackish.

  Meanwhile Alden at home had built him a new habitation,
Solid, substantial, of timber rough-hewn from the firs of the forest.
Wooden-barred was the door, and the roof was covered with rushes;
Latticed the windows were, and the window-panes were of paper,
Oiled to admit the light, while wind and rain were excluded.
There too he dug a well, and around it planted an orchard:
Still may be seen to this day some trace of the well and the orchard.
Close to the house was the stall, where, safe and secure from annoyance,
Raghorn, the snow-white steer, that had fallen to Alden's allotment
In the division of cattle, might ruminate in the night-time
Over the pastures he cropped, made fragrant by sweet pennyroyal.

  Oft when his labor was finished, with eager feet would the dreamer
Follow the pathway that ran through the woods to the house of Priscilla,
Led by illusions romantic and subtile deceptions of fancy,
Pleasure disguised as duty, and love in the semblance of friendship.
Ever of her he thought, when he fashioned the walls of his dwelling;
Ever of her he thought, when he delved in the soil of his garden;
Ever of her he thought, when he read in his Bible on Sunday
Praise of the virtuous woman, as she is described in the Proverbs,--
How the heart of her husband doth safely trust in her always,
How all the days of her life she will do him good, and not evil,
How she seeketh the wool and the flax and worketh with gladness,
How she layeth her hand to the spindle and holdeth the distaff,
How she is not afraid of the snow for herself or her household,
Knowing her household are clothed with the scarlet cloth of her weaving!

  So as she sat at her wheel one afternoon in the Autumn,
Alden, who opposite sat, and was watching her dexterous fingers,
As if the thread she was spinning were that of his life and his fortune,
After a pause in their talk, thus spake to the sound of the spindle.
"Truly, Priscilla," he said, "when I see you spinning and spinning,
Never idle a moment, but thrifty and thoughtful of others,
Suddenly you are transformed, are visibly changed in a moment;
You are no longer Priscilla, but Bertha the Beautiful Spinner."
Here the light foot on the treadle grew swifter and swifter; the spindle
Uttered an angry snarl, and the thread snapped short in her fingers;
While the impetuous speaker, not heeding the mischief, continued:
"You are the beautiful Bertha, the spinner, the queen of Helvetia;
She whose story I read at a stall in the streets of Southampton,
Who, as she rode on her palfrey, o'er valley and meadow and mountain,
Ever was spinning her thread from a distaff fixed to her saddle.
She was so thrifty and good, that her name passed into a proverb.
So shall it be with your own, when the spinning-wheel shall no longer
Hum in the house of the farmer, and fill its chambers with music.
Then shall the mothers, reproving, relate how it was in their childhood,
Praising the good old times, and the days of Priscilla the spinner!"
Straight uprose from her wheel the beautiful Puritan maiden,
Pleased with the praise of her thrift from him whose praise was the sweetest,
Drew from the reel on the table a snowy skein of her spinning,
Thus making answer, meanwhile, to the flattering phrases of Alden:
"Come, you must not be idle; if I am a pattern for housewives,
Show yourself equally worthy of being the model of husbands.
Hold this skein on your hands, while I wind it, ready for knitting;
Then who knows but hereafter, when fashions have changed and the manners,
Fathers may talk to their sons of the good old times of John Alden!"
Thus, with a jest and a laugh, the skein on his hands she adjusted,
He sitting awkwardly there, with his arms extended before him,
She standing graceful, erect, and winding the thread from his fingers,
Sometimes chiding a little his clumsy manner of holding,
Sometimes touching his hands, as she disentangled expertly
Twist or knot in the yarn, unawares--for how could she help it?--
Sending electrical thrills through every nerve in his body.

  Lo! in the midst of this scene, a breathless messenger entered,
Bringing in hurry and heat the terrible news from the village.
Yes; Miles Standish was dead!--an Indian had brought them the tidings,--
Slain by a poisoned arrow, shot down in the front of the battle,
Into an ambush beguiled, cut off with the whole of his forces;
All the town would be burned, and all the people be murdered!
Such were the tidings of evil that burst on the hearts of the hearers.
Silent and statue-like stood Priscilla, her face looking backward
Still at the face of the speaker, her arms uplifted in horror;
But John Alden, upstarting, as if the barb of the arrow
Piercing the heart of his friend had struck his own, and had sundered
Once and for ever the bonds that held him bound as a captive,
Wild with excess of sensation, the awful delight of his freedom,
Mingled with pain and regret, unconscious of what he was doing,
Clasped, almost with a groan, the motionless form of Priscilla,
Pressing her close to his heart, as for ever his own, and exclaiming:
"Those whom the Lord hath united, let no man put them asunder!"

  Even as rivulets twain, from distant and separate sources,
Seeing each other afar, as they leap from the rocks, and pursuing
Each one its devious path, but drawing nearer and nearer,
Rush together at last, at their trysting-place in the forest;
So these lives that had run thus far in separate channels,
Coming in sight of each other, then swerving and flowing asunder,
Parted by barriers strong, but drawing nearer and nearer,
Rushed together at last, and one was lost in the other.



IX

THE WEDDING-DAY

Forth from the curtain of clouds, from the tent of purple and scarlet,
Issued the sun, the great High-Priest, in his garments resplendent,
Holiness unto the Lord, in letters of light, on his forehead,
Round the hem of his robe the golden bells and pomegranates.
Blessing the world he came, and the bars of vapor beneath him
Gleamed like a grate of brass, and the sea at his feet was a laver!

  This was the wedding morn of Priscilla the Puritan maiden.
Friends were assembled together; the Elder and Magistrate also
Graced the scene with their presence, and stood like the Law and the Gospel,
One with the sanction of earth and one with the blessing of heaven.
Simple and brief was the wedding, as that of Ruth and of Boaz.
Softly the youth and the maiden repeated the words of betrothal,
Taking each other for husband and wife in the Magistrate's presence,
After the Puritan way, and the laudable custom of Holland.
Fervently then, and devoutly, the excellent Elder of Plymouth
Prayed for the hearth and the home, that were founded that day in affection,
Speaking of life and of death, and imploring divine benedictions.

  Lo! when the service was ended, a form appeared on the threshold,
Clad in armor of steel, a sombre and sorrowful figure!
Why does the bridegroom start and stare at the strange apparition?
Why does the bride turn pale, and hide her face on his shoulder?
Is it a phantom of air,--a bodiless, spectral illusion?
Is it a ghost from the grave, that has come to forbid the betrothal?
Long had it stood there unseen, a guest uninvited, unwelcomed;
Over its clouded eyes there had passed at times an expression
Softening the gloom and revealing the warm heart hidden beneath them,
As when across the sky the driving rack of the rain-cloud
Grows for a moment thin, and betrays the sun by its brightness.
Once it had lifted its hand, and moved its lips, but was silent,
As if an iron will had mastered the fleeting intention.
But when were ended the troth and the prayer and the last benediction,
Into the room it strode, and the people beheld with amazement
Bodily there in his armor Miles Standish, the Captain of Plymouth!
Grasping the bridegroom's hand, he said with emotion, "Forgive me!
I have been angry and hurt,--too long have I cherished the feeling;
I have been cruel and hard, but now, thank God! it is ended.
Mine is the same hot blood that leaped in the veins of Hugh Standish,
Sensitive, swift to resent, but as swift in atoning for error.
Never so much as now was Miles Standish the friend of John Alden."
Thereupon answered the bridegroom: "Let all be forgotten between us,--
All save the dear, old friendship, and that shall grow older and dearer!"
Then the Captain advanced, and, bowing, saluted Priscilla,
Gravely, and after the manner of old-fashioned gentry in England,
Something of camp and of court, of town and of country, commingled,
Wishing her joy of her wedding, and loudly lauding her husband.
Then he said with a smile: "I should have remembered the adage,--
If you would be well served, you must serve yourself; and moreover,
No man can gather cherries in Kent at the season of Christmas!"

  Great was the people's amazement, and greater yet their rejoicing,
Thus to behold once more the sun-burnt face of their Captain,
Whom they had mourned as dead; and they gathered and crowded about him,
Eager to see him and hear him, forgetful of bride and of bridegroom,
Questioning, answering, laughing, and each interrupting the other,
Till the good Captain declared, being quite overpowered and bewildered,
He had rather by far break into an Indian encampment,
Than come again to a wedding to which he had not been invited.

  Meanwhile the bridegroom went forth and stood with the bride at the doorway,
Breathing the perfumed air of that warm and beautiful morning.
Touched with autumnal tints, but lonely and sad in the sunshine,
Lay extended before them the land of toil and privation;
There were the graves of the dead, and the barren waste of the sea-shore,
There the familiar fields, the groves of pine, and the meadows;
But to their eyes transfigured, it seemed as the Garden of Eden,
Filled with the presence of God, whose voice was the sound of the ocean.

  Soon was their vision disturbed by the noise and stir of departure,
Friends coming forth from the house, and impatient of longer delaying,
Each with his plan for the day, and the work that was left uncompleted.
Then from a stall near at hand, amid exclamations of wonder,
Alden the thoughtful, the careful, so happy, so proud of Priscilla,
Brought out his snow-white steer, obeying the hand of its master,
Led by a cord that was tied to an iron ring in its nostrils,
Covered with crimson cloth, and a cushion placed for a saddle.
She should not walk, he said, through the dust and heat of the noonday;
Nay, she should ride like a queen, not plod along like a peasant.
Somewhat alarmed at first, but reassured by the others,
Placing her hand on the cushion, her foot in the hand of her husband,
Gayly, with joyous laugh, Priscilla mounted her palfrey.
"Nothing is wanting now," he said with a smile, "but the distaff;
Then you would be in truth my queen, my beautiful Bertha!"

  Onward the bridal procession now moved to their new habitation,
Happy husband and wife, and friends conversing together.
Pleasantly murmured the brook, as they crossed the ford in the forest,
Pleased with the image that passed, like a dream of love through its bosom,
Tremulous, floating in air, o'er the depths of the azure abysses.
Down through the golden leaves the sun was pouring his splendors,
Gleaming on purple grapes, that, from branches above them suspended,
Mingled their odorous breath with the balm of the pine and the fir-tree,
Wild and sweet as the clusters that grew in the valley of Eshcol.
Like a picture it seemed of the primitive, pastoral ages,
Fresh with the youth of the world, and recalling Rebecca and Isaac,
Old and yet ever new, and simple and beautiful always,
Love immortal and young in the endless succession of lovers,
So through the Plymouth woods passed onward the bridal procession.


**************

BIRDS OF PASSAGE.

FLIGHT THE FIRST

. . come i gru van cantando lor lai,
Facendo in aer di se lunga riga. -- DANTE


BIRDS OF PASSAGE

Black shadows fall
From the lindens tall,
That lift aloft their massive wall
  Against the southern sky;

And from the realms
Of the shadowy elms
A tide-like darkness overwhelms
  The fields that round us lie.

But the night is fair,
And everywhere
A warm, soft vapor fills the air,
  And distant sounds seem near,

And above, in the light
Of the star-lit night,
Swift birds of passage wing their flight
  Through the dewy atmosphere.

I hear the beat
Of their pinions fleet,
As from the land of snow and sleet
  They seek a southern lea.

I hear the cry
Of their voices high
Falling dreamily through the sky,
  But their forms I cannot see.

O, say not so!
Those sounds that flow
In murmurs of delight and woe
  Come not from wings of birds.

They are the throngs
Of the poet's songs,
Murmurs of pleasures, and pains, and wrongs,
  The sound of winged words.

This is the cry
Of souls, that high
On toiling, beating pinions, fly,
  Seeking a warmer clime,

From their distant flight
Through realms of light
It falls into our world of night,
  With the murmuring sound of rhyme.



PROMETHEUS

OR THE POET'S FORETHOUGHT

Of Prometheus, how undaunted
  On Olympus' shining bastions
His audacious foot he planted,
Myths are told and songs are chanted,
  Full of promptings and suggestions.

Beautiful is the tradition
  Of that flight through heavenly portals,
The old classic superstition
Of the theft and the transmission
  Of the fire of the Immortals!

First the deed of noble daring,
  Born of heavenward aspiration,
Then the fire with mortals sharing,
Then the vulture,--the despairing
  Cry of pain on crags Caucasian.

All is but a symbol painted
  Of the Poet, Prophet, Seer;
Only those are crowned and sainted
Who with grief have been acquainted,
  Making nations nobler, freer.

In their feverish exultations,
  In their triumph and their yearning,
In their passionate pulsations,
In their words among the nations,
  The Promethean fire is burning.

Shall it, then, be unavailing,
  All this toil for human culture?
Through the cloud-rack, dark and trailing,
Must they see above them sailing
  O'er life's barren crags the vulture?

Such a fate as this was Dante's,
  By defeat and exile maddened;
Thus were Milton and Cervantes,
Nature's priests and Corybantes,
  By affliction touched and saddened.

But the glories so transcendent
  That around their memories cluster,
And, on all their steps attendant,
Make their darkened lives resplendent
  With such gleams of inward lustre!

All the melodies mysterious,
  Through the dreary darkness chanted;
Thoughts in attitudes imperious,
Voices soft, and deep, and serious,
  Words that whispered, songs that haunted!

All the soul in rapt suspension,
  All the quivering, palpitating
Chords of life in utmost tension,
With the fervor of invention,
  With the rapture of creating!

Ah, Prometheus! heaven-scaling!
  In such hours of exultation
Even the faintest heart, unquailing,
Might behold the vulture sailing
  Round the cloudy crags Caucasian!

Though to all there is not given
  Strength for such sublime endeavor,
Thus to scale the walls of heaven,
And to leaven with fiery leaven
  All the hearts of men for ever;

Yet all bards, whose hearts unblighted
  Honor and believe the presage,
Hold aloft their torches lighted,
Gleaming through the realms benighted,
  As they onward bear the message!



EPIMETHEUS

OR THE POET'S AFTERTHOUGHT


Have I dreamed? or was it real,
  What I saw as in a vision,
When to marches hymeneal
In the land of the Ideal
  Moved my thought o'er Fields Elysian?

What! are these the guests whose glances
  Seemed like sunshine gleaming round me?
These the wild, bewildering fancies,
That with dithyrambic dances
  As with magic circles bound me?

Ah! how cold are their caresses!
  Pallid cheeks, and haggard bosoms!
Spectral gleam their snow-white dresses,
And from loose dishevelled tresses
  Fall the hyacinthine blossoms!

O my songs! whose winsome measures
  Filled my heart with secret rapture!
Children of my golden leisures!
Must even your delights and pleasures
  Fade and perish with the capture?

Fair they seemed, those songs sonorous,
  When they came to me unbidden;
Voices single, and in chorus,
Like the wild birds singing o'er us
  In the dark of branches hidden.

Disenchantment!  Disillusion!
  Must each noble aspiration
Come at last to this conclusion,
Jarring discord, wild confusion,
  Lassitude, renunciation?

Not with steeper fall nor faster,
  From the sun's serene dominions,
Not through brighter realms nor vaster,
In swift ruin and disaster,
  Icarus fell with shattered pinions!

Sweet Pandora! dear Pandora!
  Why did mighty Jove create thee
Coy as Thetis, fair as Flora,
Beautiful as young Aurora,
  If to win thee is to hate thee?

No, not hate thee! for this feeling
  Of unrest and long resistance
Is but passionate appealing,
A prophetic whisper stealing
  O'er the chords of our existence.

Him whom thou dost once enamour,
  Thou, beloved, never leavest;
In life's discord, strife, and clamor,
Still he feels thy spell of glamour;
  Him of Hope thou ne'er bereavest.

Weary hearts by thee are lifted,
  Struggling souls by thee are strengthened,
Clouds of fear asunder rifted,
Truth from falsehood cleansed and sifted,
  Lives, like days in summer, lengthened!

Therefore art thou ever clearer,
  O my Sibyl, my deceiver!
For thou makest each mystery clearer,
And the unattained seems nearer,
  When thou fillest my heart with fever!

Muse of all the Gifts and Graces!
  Though the fields around us wither,
There are ampler realms and spaces,
Where no foot has left its traces:
  Let us turn and wander thither!



THE LADDER OF ST. AUGUSTINE

Saint Augustine! well hast thou said,
  That of our vices we can frame
A ladder, if we will but tread
  Beneath our feet each deed of shame!

All common things, each day's events,
  That with the hour begin and end,
Our pleasures and our discontents,
  Are rounds by which we may ascend.

The low desire, the base design,
  That makes another's virtues less;
The revel of the ruddy wine,
  And all occasions of excess;

The longing for ignoble things;
  The strife for triumph more than truth;
The hardening of the heart, that brings
  Irreverence for the dreams of youth;

All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
  That have their root in thoughts of ill;
Whatever hinders or impedes
 The action of the nobler will;--

All these must first be trampled down
  Beneath our feet, if we would gain
In the bright fields of fair renown
  The right of eminent domain.

We have not wings, we cannot soar;
  But we have feet to scale and climb
By slow degrees, by more and more,
  The cloudy summits of our time.

The mighty pyramids of stone
  That wedge-like cleave the desert airs,
When nearer seen, and better known,
  Are but gigantic flights of stairs.

The distant mountains, that uprear
  Their solid bastions to the skies,
Are crossed by pathways, that appear
  As we to higher levels rise.

The heights by great men reached and kept
  Were not attained by sudden flight,
But they, while their companions slept,
  Were toiling upward in the night.

Standing on what too long we bore
  With shoulders bent and downcast eyes,
We may discern--unseen before--
  A path to higher destinies.

Nor deem the irrevocable Past,
  As wholly wasted, wholly vain,
If, rising on its wrecks, at last
  To something nobler we attain.



THE PHANTOM SHIP

In Mather's Magnalia Christi,
  Of the old colonial time,
May be found in prose the legend
  That is here set down in rhyme.

A ship sailed from New Haven,
  And the keen and frosty airs,
That filled her sails at parting,
  Were heavy with good men's prayers.

"O Lord! if it be thy pleasure"--
  Thus prayed the old divine--
"To bury our friends in the ocean,
  Take them, for they are thine!"

But Master Lamberton muttered,
  And under his breath said he,
"This ship is so crank and walty
  I fear our grave she will be!"

And the ships that came from England,
  When the winter months were gone,
Brought no tidings of this vessel
  Nor of Master Lamberton.

This put the people to praying
  That the Lord would let them hear
What in his greater wisdom
He had done with friends so dear.

And at last their prayers were answered:--
  It was in the month of June,
An hour before the sunset
  Of a windy afternoon,

When, steadily steering landward,
  A ship was seen below,
And they knew it was Lamberton, Master,
  Who sailed so long ago.

On she came, with a cloud of canvas,
  Right against the wind that blew,
Until the eye could distinguish
  The faces of the crew.

Then fell her straining topmasts,
  Hanging tangled in the shrouds,
And her sails were loosened and lifted,
  And blown away like clouds.

And the masts, with all their rigging,
  Fell slowly, one by one,
And the hulk dilated and vanished,
  As a sea-mist in the sun!

And the people who saw this marvel
  Each said unto his friend,
That this was the mould of their vessel,
  And thus her tragic end.

And the pastor of the village
  Gave thanks to God in prayer,
That, to quiet their troubled spirits,
  He had sent this Ship of Air.



THE WARDEN OF THE CINQUE PORTS

A mist was driving down the British Channel,
    The day was just begun,
And through the window-panes, on floor and panel,
    Streamed the red autumn sun.

It glanced on flowing flag and rippling pennon,
    And the white sails of ships;
And, from the frowning rampart, the black cannon
    Hailed it with feverish lips.

Sandwich and Romney, Hastings, Hithe, and Dover
    Were all alert that day,
To see the French war-steamers speeding over,
    When the fog cleared away.

Sullen and silent, and like couchant lions,
    Their cannon, through the night,
Holding their breath, had watched, in grim defiance,
    The sea-coast opposite.

And now they roared at drum-beat from their stations
    On every citadel;
Each answering each, with morning salutations,
    That all was well.

And down the coast, all taking up the burden,
    Replied the distant forts,
As if to summon from his sleep the Warden
    And Lord of the Cinque Ports.

Him shall no sunshine from the fields of azure,
    No drum-beat from the wall,
No morning gun from the black fort's embrasure,
    Awaken with its call!

No more, surveying with an eye impartial
    The long line of the coast,
Shall the gaunt figure of the old Field Marshal
    Be seen upon his post!

For in the night, unseen, a single warrior,
    In sombre harness mailed,
Dreaded of man, and surnamed the Destroyer,
    The rampart wall has scaled.

He passed into the chamber of the sleeper,
    The dark and silent room,
And as he entered, darker grew, and deeper,
    The silence and the gloom.

He did not pause to parley or dissemble,
    But smote the Warden hoar;
Ah! what a blow! that made all England tremble
    And groan from shore to shore.

Meanwhile, without, the surly cannon waited,
    The sun rose bright o'erhead;
Nothing in Nature's aspect intimated
    That a great man was dead.



HAUNTED HOUSES

All houses wherein men have lived and died
  Are haunted houses.  Through the open doors
The harmless phantoms on their errands glide,
  With feet that make no sound upon the floors.

We meet them at the door-way, on the stair,
  Along the passages they come and go,
Impalpable impressions on the air,
  A sense of something moving to and fro.

There are more guests at table, than the hosts
  Invited; the illuminated hall
Is thronged with quiet, inoffensive ghosts,
  As silent as the pictures on the wall.

The stranger at my fireside cannot see
  The forms I see, nor hear the sounds I hear;
He but perceives what is; while unto me
  All that has been is visible and clear.

We have no title-deeds to house or lands;
  Owners and occupants of earlier dates
From graves forgotten stretch their dusty hands,
  And hold in mortmain still their old estates.

The spirit-world around this world of sense
  Floats like an atmosphere, and everywhere
Wafts through these earthly mists and vapors dense
  A vital breath of more ethereal air.

Our little lives are kept in equipoise
  By opposite attractions and desires;
The struggle of the instinct that enjoys,
  And the more noble instinct that aspires.

These perturbations, this perpetual jar
  Of earthly wants and aspirations high,
Come from the influence of an unseen star,
  An undiscovered planet in our sky.

And as the moon from some dark gate of cloud
  Throws o'er the sea a floating bridge of light,
Across whose trembling planks our fancies crowd
  Into the realm of mystery and night,--

So from the world of spirits there descends
  A bridge of light, connecting it with this,
O'er whose unsteady floor, that sways and bends,
  Wander our thoughts above the dark abyss.



IN THE CHURCHYARD AT CAMBRIDGE

In the village churchyard she lies,
Dust is in her beautiful eyes,
  No more she breathes, nor feels, nor stirs;
At her feet and at her head
Lies a slave to attend the dead,
  But their dust is white as hers.

Was she a lady of high degree,
So much in love with the vanity
  And foolish pomp of this world of ours?
Or was it Christian charity,
And lowliness and humility,
  The richest and rarest of all dowers?

Who shall tell us?  No one speaks;
No color shoots into those cheeks,
  Either of anger or of pride,
At the rude question we have asked;
Nor will the mystery be unmasked
  By those who are sleeping at her side.

Hereafter?--And do you think to look
On the terrible pages of that Book
  To find her failings, faults, and errors?
Ah, you will then have other cares,
In your own short-comings and despairs,
  In your own secret sins and terrors!



THE EMPEROR'S BIRD'S-NEST

Once the Emperor Charles of Spain,
  With his swarthy, grave commanders,
I forget in what campaign,
Long besieged, in mud and rain,
  Some old frontier town of Flanders.

Up and down the dreary camp,
  In great boots of Spanish leather,
Striding with a measured tramp,
These Hidalgos, dull and damp,
  Cursed the Frenchmen, cursed the weather.

Thus as to and fro they went,
  Over upland and through hollow,
Giving their impatience vent,
Perched upon the Emperor's tent,
  In her nest, they spied a swallow.

Yes, it was a swallow's nest,
  Built of clay and hair of horses,
Mane, or tail, or dragoon's crest,
Found on hedge-rows east and west,
  After skirmish of the forces.

Then an old Hidalgo said,
  As he twirled his gray mustachio,
"Sure this swallow overhead
Thinks the Emperor's tent a shed,
  And the Emperor but a Macho!"

Hearing his imperial name
  Coupled with those words of malice,
Half in anger, half in shame,
Forth the great campaigner came
  Slowly from his canvas palace.

"Let no hand the bird molest,"
  Said he solemnly, "nor hurt her!"
Adding then, by way of jest,
"Golondrina is my guest,
  'Tis the wife of some deserter!"

Swift as bowstring speeds a shaft,
  Through the camp was spread the rumor,
And the soldiers, as they quaffed
Flemish beer at dinner, laughed
  At the Emperor's pleasant humor.

So unharmed and unafraid
  Sat the swallow still and brooded,
Till the constant cannonade
Through the walls a breach had made,
  And the siege was thus concluded.

Then the army, elsewhere bent,
  Struck its tents as if disbanding,
Only not the Emperor's tent,
For he ordered, ere he went,
  Very curtly, "Leave it standing!"

So it stood there all alone,
  Loosely flapping, torn and tattered,
Till the brood was fledged and flown,
Singing o'er those walls of stone
  Which the cannon-shot had shattered.



THE TWO ANGELS

Two angels, one of Life and one of Death,
  Passed o'er our village as the morning broke;
The dawn was on their faces, and beneath,
  The sombre houses hearsed with plumes of smoke.

Their attitude and aspect were the same,
  Alike their features and their robes of white;
But one was crowned with amaranth, as with flame,
  And one with asphodels, like flakes of light.

I saw them pause on their celestial way;
  Then said I, with deep fear and doubt oppressed,
"Beat not so loud, my heart, lest thou betray
  The place where thy beloved are at rest!"

And he who wore the crown of asphodels,
  Descending, at my door began to knock,
And my soul sank within me, as in wells
  The waters sink before an earthquake's shock.

I recognized the nameless agony,
  The terror and the tremor and the pain,
That oft before had filled or haunted me,
  And now returned with threefold strength again.

The door I opened to my heavenly guest,
  And listened, for I thought I heard God's voice;
And, knowing whatsoe'er he sent was best,
  Dared neither to lament nor to rejoice.

Then with a smile, that filled the house with light,
  "My errand is not Death, but Life," he said;
And ere I answered, passing out of sight,
  On his celestial embassy he sped.

'T was at thy door, O friend! and not at mine,
  The angel with the amaranthine wreath,
Pausing, descended, and with voice divine,
  Whispered a word that had a sound like Death.

Then fell upon the house a sudden gloom,
  A shadow on those features fair and thin;
And softly, from that hushed and darkened room,
  Two angels issued, where but one went in.

All is of God!  If he but wave his hand,
  The mists collect, the rain falls thick and loud,
Till, with a smile of light on sea and land,
  Lo! he looks back from the departing cloud.

Angels of Life and Death alike are his;
  Without his leave they pass no threshold o'er;
Who, then, would wish or dare, believing this,
  Against his messengers to shut the door?



DAYLIGHT AND MOONLIGHT

In broad daylight, and at noon,
Yesterday I saw the moon
Sailing high, but faint and white,
As a school-boy's paper kite.

In broad daylight, yesterday,
I read a Poet's mystic lay;
And it seemed to me at most
As a phantom, or a ghost.

But at length the feverish day
Like a passion died away,
And the night, serene and still,
Fell on village, vale, and hill.

Then the moon, in all her pride,
Like a spirit glorified,
Filled and overflowed the night
With revelations of her light.

And the Poet's song again
Passed like music through my brain;
Night interpreted to me
All its grace and mystery.



THE JEWISH CEMETERY AT NEWPORT

How strange it seems!  These Hebrews in their graves,
  Close by the street of this fair seaport town,
Silent beside the never-silent waves,
  At rest in all this moving up and down!

The trees are white with dust, that o'er their sleep
  Wave their broad curtains in the south-wind's breath,
While underneath such leafy tents they keep
  The long, mysterious Exodus of Death.

And these sepulchral stones, so old and brown,
  That pave with level flags their burial-place,
Seem like the tablets of the Law, thrown down
  And broken by Moses at the mountain's base.

The very names recorded here are strange,
  Of foreign accent, and of different climes;
Alvares and Rivera interchange
  With Abraham and Jacob of old times.

"Blessed be God! for he created Death!"
  The mourners said, "and Death is rest and peace";
Then added, in the certainty of faith,
  "And giveth Life that never more shall cease."

Closed are the portals of their Synagogue,
  No Psalms of David now the silence break,
No Rabbi reads the ancient Decalogue
  In the grand dialect the Prophets spake.

Gone are the living, but the dead remain,
  And not neglected; for a hand unseen,
Scattering its bounty, like a summer rain,
  Still keeps their graves and their remembrance green.

How came they here?  What burst of Christian hate,
  What persecution, merciless and blind,
Drove o'er the sea--that desert desolate--
  These Ishmaels and Hagars of mankind?

They lived in narrow streets and lanes obscure,
  Ghetto and Judenstrass, in mirk and mire;
Taught in the school of patience to endure
  The life of anguish and the death of fire.

All their lives long, with the unleavened bread
  And bitter herbs of exile and its fears,
The wasting famine of the heart they fed,
  And slaked its thirst with marah of their tears.

Anathema maranatha! was the cry
  That rang from town to town, from street to street;
At every gate the accursed Mordecai
  Was mocked and jeered, and spurned by Christian feet.

Pride and humiliation hand in hand
  Walked with them through the world where'er they went;
Trampled and beaten were they as the sand,
  And yet unshaken as the continent.

For in the background figures vague and vast
  Of patriarchs and of prophets rose sublime,
And all the great traditions of the Past
  They saw reflected in the coming time.

And thus for ever with reverted look
  The mystic volume of the world they read,
Spelling it backward, like a Hebrew book,
  Till life became a Legend of the Dead.

But ah! what once has been shall be no more!
  The groaning earth in travail and in pain
Brings forth its races, but does not restore,
  And the dead nations never rise again.



OLIVER BASSELIN

In the Valley of the Vire
  Still is seen an ancient mill,
With its gables quaint and queer,
  And beneath the window-sill,
      On the stone,
      These words alone:
"Oliver Basselin lived here."

Far above it, on the steep,
  Ruined stands the old Chateau;
Nothing but the donjon-keep
  Left for shelter or for show.
      Its vacant eyes
      Stare at the skies,
Stare at the valley green and deep.

Once a convent, old and brown,
  Looked, but ah! it looks no more,
From the neighboring hillside down
  On the rushing and the roar
      Of the stream
      Whose sunny gleam
Cheers the little Norman town.

In that darksome mill of stone,
  To the water's dash and din,
Careless, humble, and unknown,
  Sang the poet Basselin
      Songs that fill
      That ancient mill
With a splendor of its own.

Never feeling of unrest
  Broke the pleasant dream he dreamed;
Only made to be his nest,
  All the lovely valley seemed;
      No desire
      Of soaring higher
Stirred or fluttered in his breast.

True, his songs were not divine;
  Were not songs of that high art,
Which, as winds do in the pine,
  Find an answer in each heart;
      But the mirth
      Of this green earth
Laughed and revelled in his line.

From the alehouse and the inn,
  Opening on the narrow street,
Came the loud, convivial din,
  Singing and applause of feet,
      The laughing lays
      That in those days
Sang the poet Basselin.

In the castle, cased in steel,
  Knights, who fought at Agincourt,
Watched and waited, spur on heel;
  But the poet sang for sport
      Songs that rang
      Another clang,
Songs that lowlier hearts could feel.

In the convent, clad in gray,
  Sat the monks in lonely cells,
Paced the cloisters, knelt to pray,
  And the poet heard their bells;
      But his rhymes
      Found other chimes,
Nearer to the earth than they.

Gone are all the barons bold,
  Gone are all the knights and squires,
Gone the abbot stern and cold,
  And the brotherhood of friars;
      Not a name
      Remains to fame,
From those mouldering days of old!

But the poet's memory here
  Of the landscape makes a part;
Like the river, swift and clear,
  Flows his song through many a heart;
      Haunting still
      That ancient mill,
In the Valley of the Vire.



VICTOR GALBRAITH

Under the walls of Monterey
At daybreak the bugles began to play,
      Victor Galbraith!
In the mist of the morning damp and gray,
These were the words they seemed to say:
      "Come forth to thy death,
      Victor Galbraith!"

Forth he came, with a martial tread;
Firm was his step, erect his head;
      Victor Galbraith,
He who so well the bugle played,
Could not mistake the words it said:
      "Come forth to thy death,
      Victor Galbraith!"

He looked at the earth, he looked at the sky,
He looked at the files of musketry,
      Victor Galbraith!
And he said, with a steady voice and eye,
"Take good aim; I am ready to die!"
      Thus challenges death
      Victor Galbraith.

Twelve fiery tongues flashed straight and red,
Six leaden balls on their errand sped;
      Victor Galbraith
Falls to the ground, but he is not dead;
His name was not stamped on those balls of lead,
      And they only scath
      Victor Galbraith.

Three balls are in his breast and brain,
But he rises out of the dust again,
      Victor Galbraith!
The water he drinks has a bloody stain;
"O kill me, and put me out of my pain!"
      In his agony prayeth
      Victor Galbraith.

Forth dart once more those tongues of flame,
And the bugler has died a death of shame,
      Victor Galbraith!
His soul has gone back to whence it came,
And no one answers to the name,
      When the Sergeant saith,
      "Victor Galbraith!"

Under the walls of Monterey
By night a bugle is heard to play,
      Victor Galbraith!
Through the mist of the valley damp and gray
The sentinels hear the sound, and say,
      "That is the wraith
      Of Victor Galbraith!"



MY LOST YOUTH

Often I think of the beautiful town
  That is seated by the sea;
Often in thought go up and down
The pleasant streets of that dear old town,
  And my youth comes back to me.
    And a verse of a Lapland song
    Is haunting my memory still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I can see the shadowy lines of its trees,
  And catch, in sudden gleams,
The sheen of the far-surrounding seas,
And islands that were the Hersperides
  Of all my boyish dreams.
    And the burden of that old song,
    It murmurs and whispers still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I remember the black wharves and the slips,
  And the sea-tides tossing free;
And Spanish sailors with bearded lips,
And the beauty and mystery of the ships,
  And the magic of the sea.
    And the voice of that wayward song
    Is singing and saying still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I remember the bulwarks by the shore,
  And the fort upon the hill;
The sunrise gun, with its hollow roar,
The drum-beat repeated o'er and o'er,
  And the bugle wild and shrill.
    And the music of that old song
    Throbs in my memory still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I remember the sea-fight far away,
  How it thundered o'er the tide!
And the dead captains, as they lay
In their graves, o'erlooking the tranquil bay,
  Where they in battle died.
    And the sound of that mournful song
    Goes through me with a thrill:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I can see the breezy dome of groves,
  The shadows of Deering's Woods;
And the friendships old and the early loves
Come back with a sabbath sound, as of doves
  In quiet neighborhoods.
    And the verse of that sweet old song,
    It flutters and murmurs still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

I remember the gleams and glooms that dart
  Across the schoolboy's brain;
The song and the silence in the heart,
That in part are prophecies, and in part
  Are longings wild and vain.
    And the voice of that fitful song
    Sings on, and is never still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

There are things of which I may not speak;
  There are dreams that cannot die;
There are thoughts that make the strong heart weak,
And bring a pallor into the cheek,
  And a mist before the eye.
    And the words of that fatal song
    Come over me like a chill:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

Strange to me now are the forms I meet
  When I visit the dear old town;
But the native air is pure and sweet,
And the trees that o'ershadow each well-known street,
  As they balance up and down,
    Are singing the beautiful song,
    Are sighing and whispering still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

And Deering's Woods are fresh and fair,
  And with joy that is almost pain
My heart goes back to wander there,
And among the dreams of the days that were,
  I find my lost youth again.
    And the strange and beautiful song,
    The groves are repeating it still:
  "A boy's will is the wind's will,
And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."



THE ROPEWALK

In that building, long and low,
With its windows all a-row,
  Like the port-holes of a hulk,
Human spiders spin and spin,
Backward down their threads so thin
  Dropping, each a hempen bulk.

At the end, an open door;
Squares of sunshine on the floor
  Light the long and dusky lane;
And the whirring of a wheel,
Dull and drowsy, makes me feel
  All its spokes are in my brain.

As the spinners to the end
Downward go and reascend,
  Gleam the long threads in the sun;
While within this brain of mine
Cobwebs brighter and more fine
  By the busy wheel are spun.

Two fair maidens in a swing,
Like white doves upon the wing,
  First before my vision pass;
Laughing, as their gentle hands
Closely clasp the twisted strands,
  At their shadow on the grass.

Then a booth of mountebanks,
With its smell of tan and planks,
  And a girl poised high in air
On a cord, in spangled dress,
With a faded loveliness,
  And a weary look of care.

Then a homestead among farms,
And a woman with bare arms
  Drawing water from a well;
As the bucket mounts apace,
With it mounts her own fair face,
  As at some magician's spell.

Then an old man in a tower,
Ringing loud the noontide hour,
  While the rope coils round and round
Like a serpent at his feet,
And again, in swift retreat,
  Nearly lifts him from the ground.

Then within a prison-yard,
Faces fixed, and stern, and hard,
  Laughter and indecent mirth;
Ah! it is the gallows-tree!
Breath of Christian charity,
  Blow, and sweep it from the earth!

Then a school-boy, with his kite
Gleaming in a sky of light,
  And an eager, upward look;
Steeds pursued through lane and field;
Fowlers with their snares concealed;
  And an angler by a brook.

Ships rejoicing in the breeze,
Wrecks that float o'er unknown seas,
  Anchors dragged through faithless sand;
Sea-fog drifting overhead,
And, with lessening line and lead,
  Sailors feeling for the land.

All these scenes do I behold,
These, and many left untold,
  In that building long and low;
While the wheel goes round and round,
With a drowsy, dreamy sound,
  And the spinners backward go.



THE GOLDEN MILE-STONE

Leafless are the trees; their purple branches
Spread themselves abroad, like reefs of coral,
      Rising silent
In the Red Sea of the Winter sunset.

From the hundred chimneys of the village,
Like the Afreet in the Arabian story,
      Smoky columns
Tower aloft into the air of amber.

At the window winks the flickering fire-light;
Here and there the lamps of evening glimmer,
      Social watch-fires
Answering one another through the darkness.

On the hearth the lighted logs are glowing,
And like Ariel in the cloven pine-tree
      For its freedom
Groans and sighs the air imprisoned in them.

By the fireside there are old men seated,
Seeing ruined cities in the ashes,
      Asking sadly
Of the Past what it can ne'er restore them.

By the fireside there are youthful dreamers,
Building castles fair, with stately stairways,
      Asking blindly
Of the Future what it cannot give them.

By the fireside tragedies are acted
In whose scenes appear two actors only,
      Wife and husband,
And above them God the sole spectator.

By the fireside there are peace and comfort,
Wives and children, with fair, thoughtful faces,
      Waiting, watching
For a well-known footstep in the passage.

Each man's chimney is his Golden Mile-stone;
Is the central point, from which he measures
      Every distance
Through the gateways of the world around him.

In his farthest wanderings still he sees it;
Hears the talking flame, the answering night-wind,
      As he heard them
When he sat with those who were, but are not.

Happy he whom neither wealth nor fashion,
Nor the march of the encroaching city,
      Drives an exile
From the hearth of his ancestral homestead.

We may build more splendid habitations,
Fill our rooms with paintings and with sculptures,
      But we cannot
Buy with gold the old associations!



CATAWBA WINE

    This song of mine
    Is a Song of the Vine,
To be sung by the glowing embers
    Of wayside inns,
    When the rain begins
To darken the drear Novembers.

    It is not a song
    Of the Scuppernong,
From warm Carolinian valleys,
    Nor the Isabel
    And the Muscadel
That bask in our garden alleys.

    Nor the red Mustang,
    Whose clusters hang
O'er the waves of the Colorado,
    And the fiery flood
    Of whose purple blood
Has a dash of Spanish bravado.

    For richest and best
    Is the wine of the West,
That grows by the Beautiful River;
    Whose sweet perfume
    Fills all the room
With a benison on the giver.

    And as hollow trees
    Are the haunts of bees,
For ever going and coming;
    So this crystal hive
    Is all alive
With a swarming and buzzing and humming.

    Very good in its way
    Is the Verzenay,
Or the Sillery soft and creamy;
    But Catawba wine
    Has a taste more divine,
More dulcet, delicious, and dreamy.

    There grows no vine
    By the haunted Rhine,
By Danube or Guadalquivir,
    Nor on island or cape,
    That bears such a grape
As grows by the Beautiful River.

    Drugged is their juice
    For foreign use,
When shipped o'er the reeling Atlantic,
    To rack our brains
    With the fever pains,
That have driven the Old World frantic.

    To the sewers and sinks
    With all such drinks,
And after them tumble the mixer;
    For a poison malign
    Is such Borgia wine,
Or at best but a Devil's Elixir.

    While pure as a spring
    Is the wine I sing,
And to praise it, one needs but name it;
    For Catawba wine
    Has need of no sign,
No tavern-bush to proclaim it.

    And this Song of the Vine,
    This greeting of mine,
The winds and the birds shall deliver
    To the Queen of the West,
    In her garlands dressed,
On the banks of the Beautiful River.



SANTA FILOMENA

Whene'er a noble deed is wrought,
Whene'er is spoken a noble thought,
   Our hearts, in glad surprise,
   To higher levels rise.

The tidal wave of deeper souls
Into our inmost being rolls,
   And lifts us unawares
   Out of all meaner cares.

Honor to those whose words or deeds
Thus help us in our daily needs,
   And by their overflow
   Raise us from what is low!

Thus thought I, as by night I read
Of the great army of the dead,
   The trenches cold and damp,
   The starved and frozen camp,--

The wounded from the battle-plain,
In dreary hospitals of pain,
   The cheerless corridors,
   The cold and stony floors.

Lo! in that house of misery
A lady with a lamp I see
   Pass through the glimmering gloom,
   And flit from room to room.

And slow, as in a dream of bliss,
The speechless sufferer turns to kiss
   Her shadow, as it falls
   Upon the darkening walls.

As if a door in heaven should be
Opened and then closed suddenly,
   The vision came and went,
   The light shone and was spent.

On England's annals, through the long
Hereafter of her speech and song,
   That light its rays shall cast
   From portals of the past.

A Lady with a Lamp shall stand
In the great history of the land,
   A noble type of good,
   Heroic womanhood.

Nor even shall be wanting here
The palm, the lily, and the spear,
   The symbols that of yore
   Saint Filomena bore.



THE DISCOVERER OF THE NORTH CAPE

A LEAF FROM KING ALFRED'S OROSIUS

Othere, the old sea-captain,
  Who dwelt in Helgoland,
To King Alfred, the Lover of Truth,
Brought a snow-white walrus-tooth,
  Which he held in his brown right hand.

His figure was tall and stately,
  Like a boy's his eye appeared;
His hair was yellow as hay,
But threads of a silvery gray
  Gleamed in his tawny beard.

Hearty and hale was Othere,
  His cheek had the color of oak;
With a kind of laugh in his speech,
Like the sea-tide on a beach,
  As unto the King he spoke.

And Alfred, King of the Saxons,
  Had a book upon his knees,
And wrote down the wondrous tale
Of him who was first to sail
   Into the Arctic seas.

"So far I live to the northward,
  No man lives north of me;
To the east are wild mountain-chains;
And beyond them meres and plains;
  To the westward all is sea.

"So far I live to the northward,
  From the harbor of Skeringes-hale,
If you only sailed by day,
With a fair wind all the way,
  More than a month would you sail.

"I own six hundred reindeer,
  With sheep and swine beside;
I have tribute from the Finns,
Whalebone and reindeer-skins,
  And ropes of walrus-hide.

"I ploughed the land with horses,
  But my heart was ill at ease,
For the old seafaring men
Came to me now and then,
  With their sagas of the seas;--

"Of Iceland and of Greenland,
  And the stormy Hebrides,
And the undiscovered deep;--
I could not eat nor sleep
  For thinking of those seas.

"To the northward stretched the desert,
  How far I fain would know;
So at last I sallied forth,
And three days sailed due north,
  As far as the whale-ships go.

"To the west of me was the ocean,
  To the right the desolate shore,
But I did not slacken sail
For the walrus or the whale,
  Till after three days more.

"The days grew longer and longer,
  Till they became as one,
And southward through the haze
I saw the sullen blaze
  Of the red midnight sun.

"And then uprose before me,
  Upon the water's edge,
The huge and haggard shape
Of that unknown North Cape,
  Whose form is like a wedge.

"The sea was rough and stormy,
  The tempest howled and wailed,
And the sea-fog, like a ghost,
Haunted that dreary coast,
  But onward still I sailed.

"Four days I steered to eastward,
  Four days without a night:
Round in a fiery ring
Went the great sun, O King,
  With red and lurid light."

Here Alfred, King of the Saxons,
  Ceased writing for a while;
And raised his eyes from his book,
With a strange and puzzled look,
  And an incredulous smile.

But Othere, the old sea-captain,
  He neither paused nor stirred,
Till the King listened, and then
Once more took up his pen,
  And wrote down every word.

"And now the land," said Othere,
  "Bent southward suddenly,
And I followed the curving shore
And ever southward bore
  Into a nameless sea.

"And there we hunted the walrus,
  The narwhale, and the seal;
Ha! 't was a noble game!
And like the lightning's flame
  Flew our harpoons of steel.

"There were six of us all together,
  Norsemen of Helgoland;
In two days and no more
We killed of them threescore,
  And dragged them to the strand!"

Here Alfred the Truth-Teller
  Suddenly closed his book,
And lifted his blue eyes,
With doubt and strange surmise
  Depicted in their look.

And Othere the old sea-captain
  Stared at him wild and weird,
Then smiled, till his shining teeth
Gleamed white from underneath
  His tawny, quivering beard.

And to the King of the Saxons,
  In witness of the truth,
Raising his noble head,
He stretched his brown hand, and said,
  "Behold this walrus-tooth!"



DAYBREAK

A wind came up out of the sea,
And said, "O mists, make room for me."

It hailed the ships, and cried, "Sail on,
Ye mariners, the night is gone."

And hurried landward far away,
Crying, "Awake! it is the day."

It said unto the forest, "Shout!
Hang all your leafy banners out!"

It touched the wood-bird's folded wing,
And said, "O bird, awake and sing."

And o'er the farms, "O chanticleer,
Your clarion blow; the day is near."

It whispered to the fields of corn,
"Bow down, and hail the coming morn."

It shouted through the belfry-tower,
"Awake, O bell! proclaim the hour."

It crossed the churchyard with a sigh,
And said, "Not yet! in quiet lie."



THE FIFTIETH BIRTHDAY OF AGASSIZ

MAY 28, 1857

It was fifty years ago
  In the pleasant month of May,
In the beautiful Pays de Vaud,
  A child in its cradle lay.

And Nature, the old nurse, took
  The child upon her knee,
Saying: "Here is a story-book
  Thy Father has written for thee."

"Come, wander with me," she said,
  "Into regions yet untrod;
And read what is still unread
  In the manuscripts of God."

And he wandered away and away
  With Nature, the dear old nurse,
Who sang to him night and day
 The rhymes of the universe.

And whenever the way seemed long,
  Or his heart began to fail,
She would sing a more wonderful song,
  Or tell a more marvellous tale.

So she keeps him still a child,
  And will not let him go,
Though at times his heart beats wild
  For the beautiful Pays de Vaud;

Though at times he hears in his dreams
  The Ranz des Vaches of old,
And the rush of mountain streams
  From glaciers clear and cold;

And the mother at home says, "Hark!
  For his voice I listen and yearn;
It is growing late and dark,
  And my boy does not return!"



CHILDREN

Come to me, O ye children!
  For I hear you at your play,
And the questions that perplexed me
  Have vanished quite away.

Ye open the eastern windows,
  That look towards the sun,
Where thoughts are singing swallows
  And the brooks of morning run.

In your hearts are the birds and the sunshine,
  In your thoughts the brooklet's flow,
But in mine is the wind of Autumn
  And the first fall of the snow.

Ah! what would the world be to us
  If the children were no more?
We should dread the desert behind us
  Worse than the dark before.

What the leaves are to the forest,
  With light and air for food,
Ere their sweet and tender juices
  Have been hardened into wood,--

That to the world are children;
  Through them it feels the glow
Of a brighter and sunnier climate
  Than reaches the trunks below.

Come to me, O ye children!
  And whisper in my ear
What the birds and the winds are singing
  In your sunny atmosphere.

For what are all our contrivings,
  And the wisdom of our books,
When compared with your caresses,
  And the gladness of your looks?

Ye are better than all the ballads
  That ever were sung or said;
For ye are living poems,
  And all the rest are dead.



SANDALPHON

Have you read in the Talmud of old,
In the Legends the Rabbins have told
  Of the limitless realms of the air,--
Have you read it,--the marvellous story
Of Sandalphon, the Angel of Glory,
  Sandalphon, the Angel of Prayer?

How, erect, at the outermost gates
Of the City Celestial he waits,
  With his feet on the ladder of light,
That, crowded with angels unnumbered,
By Jacob was seen, as he slumbered
  Alone in the desert at night?

The Angels of Wind and of Fire
Chant only one hymn, and expire
  With the song's irresistible stress;
Expire in their rapture and wonder,
As harp-strings are broken asunder
  By music they throb to express.

But serene in the rapturous throng,
Unmoved by the rush of the song,
  With eyes unimpassioned and slow,
Among the dead angels, the deathless
Sandalphon stands listening breathless
  To sounds that ascend from below;--

From the spirits on earth that adore,
From the souls that entreat and implore
  In the fervor and passion of prayer;
From the hearts that are broken with losses,
And weary with dragging the crosses
  Too heavy for mortals to bear.

And he gathers the prayers as he stands,
And they change into flowers in his hands,
  Into garlands of purple and red;
And beneath the great arch of the portal,
Through the streets of the City Immortal
  Is wafted the fragrance they shed.

It is but a legend, I know,--
A fable, a phantom, a show,
  Of the ancient Rabbinical lore;
Yet the old mediaeval tradition,
The beautiful, strange superstition,
  But haunts me and holds me the more.

When I look from my window at night,
And the welkin above is all white,
  All throbbing and panting with stars,
Among them majestic is standing
Sandalphon the angel, expanding
  His pinions in nebulous bars.

And the legend, I feel, is a part
Of the hunger and thirst of the heart,
  The frenzy and fire of the brain,
That grasps at the fruitage forbidden,
The golden pomegranates of Eden,
  To quiet its fever and pain.



FLIGHT THE SECOND

THE CHILDREN'S HOUR

Between the dark and the daylight,
  When the night is beginning to lower,
Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
 That is known as the Children's Hour.

I hear in the chamber above me
  The patter of little feet,
The sound of a door that is opened,
  And voices soft and sweet.

From my study I see in the lamplight,
  Descending the broad hall stair,
Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra,
  And Edith with golden hair.

A whisper, and then a silence:
  Yet I know by their merry eyes
They are plotting and planning together
  To take me by surprise.

A sudden rush from the stairway,
  A sudden raid from the hall!
By three doors left unguarded
  They enter my castle wall!

They climb up into my turret
  O'er the arms and back of my chair;
If I try to escape, they surround me;
  They seem to be everywhere.

They almost devour me with kisses,
  Their arms about me entwine,
Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen
  In his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine!

Do you think, o blue-eyed banditti,
  Because you have scaled the wall,
Such an old mustache as I am
  Is not a match for you all!

I have you fast in my fortress,
  And will not let you depart,
But put you down into the dungeon
  In the round-tower of my heart.

And there will I keep you forever,
  Yes, forever and a day,
Till the walls shall crumble to ruin,
  And moulder in dust away!



ENCELADUS

Under Mount Etna he lies,
  It is slumber, it is not death;
For he struggles at times to arise,
And above him the lurid skies
  Are hot with his fiery breath.

The crags are piled on his breast,
  The earth is heaped on his head;
But the groans of his wild unrest,
Though smothered and half suppressed,
  Are heard, and he is not dead.

And the nations far away
  Are watching with eager eyes;
They talk together and say,
"To-morrow, perhaps to-day,
  Euceladus will arise!"

And the old gods, the austere
  Oppressors in their strength,
Stand aghast and white with fear
At the ominous sounds they hear,
  And tremble, and mutter, "At length!"

Ah me! for the land that is sown
  With the harvest of despair!
Where the burning cinders, blown
From the lips of the overthrown
  Enceladus, fill the air.

Where ashes are heaped in drifts
  Over vineyard and field and town,
Whenever he starts and lifts
His head through the blackened rifts
  Of the crags that keep him down.

See, see! the red light shines!
  'T is the glare of his awful eyes!
And the storm-wind shouts through the pines
Of Alps and of Apennines,
  "Enceladus, arise!"



THE CUMBERLAND

At anchor in Hampton Roads we lay,
  On board of the cumberland, sloop-of-war;
And at times from the fortress across the bay
    The alarum of drums swept past,
    Or a bugle blast
  From the camp on the shore.

Then far away to the south uprose
  A little feather of snow-white smoke,
And we knew that the iron ship of our foes
    Was steadily steering its course
    To try the force
  Of our ribs of oak.

Down upon us heavily runs,
  Silent and sullen, the floating fort;
Then comes a puff of smoke from her guns,
    And leaps the terrible death,
    With fiery breath,
  From each open port.

We are not idle, but send her straight
  Defiance back in a full broadside!
As hail rebounds from a roof of slate,
    Rebounds our heavier hail
    From each iron scale
  Of the monster's hide.

"Strike your flag!" the rebel cries,
  In his arrogant old plantation strain.
"Never!" our gallant Morris replies;
    "It is better to sink than to yield!"
    And the whole air pealed
  With the cheers of our men.

Then, like a kraken huge and black,
  She crushed our ribs in her iron grasp!
Down went the Cumberland all a wrack,
    With a sudden shudder of death,
    And the cannon's breath
  For her dying gasp.

Next morn, as the sun rose over the bay,
  Still floated our flag at the mainmast head.
Lord, how beautiful was Thy day!
    Every waft of the air
    Was a whisper of prayer,
  Or a dirge for the dead.

Ho! brave hearts that went down in the seas
  Ye are at peace in the troubled stream;
Ho! brave land! with hearts like these,
    Thy flag, that is rent in twain,
    Shall be one again,
  And without a seam!



SNOW-FLAKES

Out of the bosom of the Air,
  Out of the cloud-folds of her garments shaken,
Over the woodlands brown and bare,
  Over the harvest-fields forsaken,
    Silent, and soft, and slow
    Descends the snow.

Even as our cloudy fancies take
  Suddenly shape in some divine expression,
Even as the troubled heart doth make
  In the white countenance confession,
    The troubled sky reveals
    The grief it feels.

This is the poem of the air,
  Slowly in silent syllables recorded;
This is the secret of despair,
  Long in its cloudy bosom hoarded,
    Now whispered and revealed
    To wood and field.



A DAY OF SUNSHINE

O gift of God!  O perfect day:
Whereon shall no man work, but play;
Whereon it is enough for me,
Not to be doing, but to be!

Through every fibre of my brain,
Through every nerve, through every vein,
I feel the electric thrill, the touch
Of life, that seems almost too much.

I hear the wind among the trees
Playing celestial symphonies;
I see the branches downward bent,
Like keys of some great instrument.

And over me unrolls on high
The splendid scenery of the sky,
Where though a sapphire sea the sun
Sails like a golden galleon,

Towards yonder cloud-land in the West,
Towards yonder Islands of the Blest,
Whose steep sierra far uplifts
Its craggy summits white with drifts.

Blow, winds! and waft through all the rooms
The snow-flakes of the cherry-blooms!
Blow, winds! and bend within my reach
The fiery blossoms of the peach!

O Life and Love! O happy throng
Of thoughts, whose only speech is song!
O heart of man! canst thou not be
Blithe as the air is, and as free?



SOMETHING LEFT UNDONE

Labor with what zeal we will,
  Something still remains undone,
Something uncompleted still
  Waits the rising of the sun.

By the bedside, on the stair,
  At the threshold, near the gates,
With its menace or its prayer,
  Like a mendicant it waits;

Waits, and will not go away;
  Waits, and will not be gainsaid;
By the cares of yesterday
  Each to-day is heavier made;

Till at length the burden seems
  Greater than our strength can bear,
Heavy as the weight of dreams,
  Pressing on us everywhere.

And we stand from day to day,
  Like the dwarfs of times gone by,
Who, as Northern legends say,
  On their shoulders held the sky.



WEARINESS

O little feet! that such long years
Must wander on through hopes and fears,
  Must ache and bleed beneath your load;
I, nearer to the wayside inn
Where toil shall cease and rest begin,
  Am weary, thinking of your road!

O little hands! that, weak or strong,
Have still to serve or rule so long,
  Have still so long to give or ask;
I, who so much with book and pen
Have toiled among my fellow-men,
  Am weary, thinking of your task.

O little hearts! that throb and beat
With such impatient, feverish heat,
  Such limitless and strong desires;
Mine that so long has glowed and burned,
With passions into ashes turned
  Now covers and conceals its fires.

O little souls! as pure and white
And crystalline as rays of light
  Direct from heaven, their source divine;
Refracted through the mist of years,
How red my setting sun appears,
  How lurid looks this soul of mine!


****************


TALES OF A WAYSIDE INN

PART FIRST

PRELUDE

THE WAYSIDE INN

One Autumn night, in Sudbury town,
Across the meadows bare and brown,
The windows of the wayside inn
Gleamed red with fire-light through the leaves
Of woodbine, hanging from the eaves
Their crimson curtains rent and thin.

As ancient is this hostelry
As any in the land may be,
Built in the old Colonial day,
When men lived in a grander way,
With ampler hospitality;
A kind of old Hobgoblin Hall,
Now somewhat fallen to decay,
With weather-stains upon the wall,
And stairways worn, and crazy doors,
And creaking and uneven floors,
And chimneys huge, and tiled and tall.

A region of repose it seems,
A place of slumber and of dreams,
Remote among the wooded hills!
For there no noisy railway speeds,
Its torch-race scattering smoke and gleeds;
But noon and night, the panting teams
Stop under the great oaks, that throw
Tangles of light and shade below,
On roofs and doors and window-sills.
Across the road the barns display
Their lines of stalls, their mows of hay,
Through the wide doors the breezes blow,
The wattled cocks strut to and fro,
And, half effaced by rain and shine,
The Red Horse prances on the sign.
Round this old-fashioned, quaint abode
Deep silence reigned, save when a gust
Went rushing down the county road,
And skeletons of leaves, and dust,
A moment quickened by its breath,
Shuddered and danced their dance of death,
And through the ancient oaks o'erhead
Mysterious voices moaned and fled.

But from the parlor of the inn
A pleasant murmur smote the ear,
Like water rushing through a weir:
Oft interrupted by the din
Of laughter and of loud applause,
And, in each intervening pause,
The music of a violin.
The fire-light, shedding over all
The splendor of its ruddy glow,
Filled the whole parlor large and low;
It gleamed on wainscot and on wall,
It touched with more than wonted grace
Fair Princess Mary's pictured face;
It bronzed the rafters overhead,
On the old spinet's ivory keys
It played inaudible melodies,
It crowned the sombre clock with flame,
The hands, the hours, the maker's name,
And painted with a livelier red
The Landlord's coat-of-arms again;
And, flashing on the window-pane,
Emblazoned with its light and shade
The jovial rhymes, that still remain,
Writ near a century ago,
By the great Major Molineaux,
Whom Hawthorne has immortal made.

Before the blazing fire of wood
Erect the rapt musician stood;
And ever and anon he bent
His head upon his instrument,
And seemed to listen, till he caught
Confessions of its secret thought,--
The joy, the triumph, the lament,
The exultation and the pain;
Then, by the magic of his art,
He soothed the throbbings of its heart,
And lulled it into peace again.

Around the fireside at their ease
There sat a group of friends, entranced
With the delicious melodies
Who from the far-off noisy town
Had to the wayside inn come down,
To rest beneath its old oak-trees.
The fire-light on their faces glanced,
Their shadows on the wainscot danced,
And, though of different lands and speech,
Each had his tale to tell, and each
Was anxious to be pleased and please.
And while the sweet musician plays,
Let me in outline sketch them all,
Perchance uncouthly as the blaze
With its uncertain touch portrays
Their shadowy semblance on the wall.

But first the Landlord will I trace;
Grave in his aspect and attire;
A man of ancient pedigree,
A Justice of the Peace was he,
Known in all Sudbury as "The Squire."
Proud was he of his name and race,
Of old Sir William and Sir Hugh,
And in the parlor, full in view,
His coat-of-arms, well framed and glazed,
Upon the wall in colors blazed;
He beareth gules upon his shield,
A chevron argent in the field,
With three wolf's heads, and for the crest
A Wyvern part-per-pale addressed
Upon a helmet barred; below
The scroll reads, "By the name of Howe."
And over this, no longer bright,
Though glimmering with a latent light,
Was hung the sword his grandsire bore
In the rebellious days of yore,
Down there at Concord in the fight.

A youth was there, of quiet ways,
A Student of old books and days,
To whom all tongues and lands were known
And yet a lover of his own;
With many a social virtue graced,
And yet a friend of solitude;
A man of such a genial mood
The heart of all things he embraced,
And yet of such fastidious taste,
He never found the best too good.
Books were his passion and delight,
And in his upper room at home
Stood many a rare and sumptuous tome,
In vellum bound, with gold bedight,
Great volumes garmented in white,
Recalling Florence, Pisa, Rome.
He loved the twilight that surrounds
The border-land of old romance;
Where glitter hauberk, helm, and lance,
And banner waves, and trumpet sounds,
And ladies ride with hawk on wrist,
And mighty warriors sweep along,
Magnified by the purple mist,
The dusk of centuries and of song.
The chronicles of Charlemagne,
Of Merlin and the Mort d'Arthure,
Mingled together in his brain
With tales of Flores and Blanchefleur,
Sir Ferumbras, Sir Eglamour,
Sir Launcelot, Sir Morgadour,
Sir Guy, Sir Bevis, Sir Gawain.

A young Sicilian, too, was there;
In sight of Etna born and bred,
Some breath of its volcanic air
Was glowing in his heart and brain,
And, being rebellious to his liege,
After Palermo's fatal siege,
Across the western seas he fled,
In good King Bomba's happy reign.
His face was like a summer night,
All flooded with a dusky light;
His hands were small; his teeth shone white
As sea-shells, when he smiled or spoke;
His sinews supple and strong as oak;
Clean shaven was he as a priest,
Who at the mass on Sunday sings,
Save that upon his upper lip
His beard, a good palm's length least,
Level and pointed at the tip,
Shot sideways, like a swallow's wings.
The poets read he o'er and o'er,
And most of all the Immortal Four
Of Italy; and next to those,
The story-telling bard of prose,
Who wrote the joyous Tuscan tales
Of the Decameron, that make
Fiesole's green hills and vales
Remembered for Boccaccio's sake.
Much too of music was his thought;
The melodies and measures fraught
With sunshine and the open air,
Of vineyards and the singing sea
Of his beloved Sicily;
And much it pleased him to peruse
The songs of the Sicilian muse,--
Bucolic songs by Meli sung
In the familiar peasant tongue,
That made men say, "Behold! once more
The pitying gods to earth restore
Theocritus of Syracuse!"

A Spanish Jew from Alicant
With aspect grand and grave was there;
Vender of silks and fabrics rare,
And attar of rose from the Levant.
Like an old Patriarch he appeared,
Abraham or Isaac, or at least
Some later Prophet or High-Priest;
With lustrous eyes, and olive skin,
And, wildly tossed from cheeks and chin,
The tumbling cataract of his beard.
His garments breathed a spicy scent
Of cinnamon and sandal blent,
Like the soft aromatic gales
That meet the mariner, who sails
Through the Moluccas, and the seas
That wash the shores of Celebes.
All stories that recorded are
By Pierre Alphonse he knew by heart,
And it was rumored he could say
The Parables of Sandabar,
And all the Fables of Pilpay,
Or if not all, the greater part!
Well versed was he in Hebrew books,
Talmud and Targum, and the lore
Of Kabala; and evermore
There was a mystery in his looks;
His eyes seemed gazing far away,
As if in vision or in trance
He heard the solemn sackbut play,
And saw the Jewish maidens dance.

A Theologian, from the school
Of Cambridge on the Charles, was there;
Skilful alike with tongue and pen,
He preached to all men everywhere
The Gospel of the Golden Rule,
The New Commandment given to men,
Thinking the deed, and not the creed,
Would help us in our utmost need.
With reverent feet the earth he trod,
Nor banished nature from his plan,
But studied still with deep research
To build the Universal Church,
Lofty as in the love of God,
And ample as the wants of man.

A Poet, too, was there, whose verse
Was tender, musical, and terse;
The inspiration, the delight,
The gleam, the glory, the swift flight,
Of thoughts so sudden, that they seem
The revelations of a dream,
All these were his; but with them came
No envy of another's fame;
He did not find his sleep less sweet
For music in some neighboring street,
Nor rustling hear in every breeze
The laurels of Miltiades.
Honor and blessings on his head
While living, good report when dead,
Who, not too eager for renown,
Accepts, but does not clutch, the crown!

Last the Musician, as he stood
Illumined by that fire of wood;
Fair-haired, blue-eyed, his aspect blithe.
His figure tall and straight and lithe,
And every feature of his face
Revealing his Norwegian race;
A radiance, streaming from within,
Around his eyes and forehead beamed,
The Angel with the violin,
Painted by Raphael, he seemed.
He lived in that ideal world
Whose language is not speech, but song;
Around him evermore the throng
Of elves and sprites their dances whirled;
The Stromkarl sang, the cataract hurled
Its headlong waters from the height;
And mingled in the wild delight
The scream of sea-birds in their flight,
The rumor of the forest trees,
The plunge of the implacable seas,
The tumult of the wind at night,
Voices of eld, like trumpets blowing,
Old ballads, and wild melodies
Through mist and darkness pouring forth,
Like Elivagar's river flowing
Out of the glaciers of the North.

The instrument on which he played
Was in Cremona's workshops made,
By a great master of the past,
Ere yet was lost the art divine;
Fashioned of maple and of pine,
That in Tyrolian forests vast
Had rocked and wrestled with the blast;
Exquisite was it in design,
Perfect in each minutest part.
A marvel of the lutist's art;
And in its hollow chamber, thus,
The maker from whose hands it came
Had written his unrivalled name,--
"Antonius Stradivarius."

And when he played, the atmosphere
Was filled with magic, and the ear
Caught echoes of that Harp of Gold,
Whose music had so weird a sound,
The hunted stag forgot to bound,
The leaping rivulet backward rolled,
The birds came down from bush and tree,
The dead came from beneath the sea,
The maiden to the harper's knee!

The music ceased; the applause was loud,
The pleased musician smiled and bowed;
The wood-fire clapped its hands of flame,
The shadows on the wainscot stirred,
And from the harpsichord there came
A ghostly murmur of acclaim,
A sound like that sent down at night
By birds of passage in their flight,
From the remotest distance heard.

Then silence followed; then began
A clamor for the Landlord's tale,--
The story promised them of old,
They said, but always left untold;
And he, although a bashful man,
And all his courage seemed to fail,
Finding excuse of no avail,
Yielded; and thus the story ran.



THE LANDLORD'S TALE.

PAUL REVERE'S RIDE.

Listen, my children, and you shall hear
Of the midnight ride of Paul Revere,
On the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five;
Hardly a man is now alive
Who remembers that famous day and year.

He said to his friend, "If the British march
By land or sea from the town to-night,
Hang a lantern aloft in the belfry arch
Of the North Church tower as a signal light,--
One, if by land, and two, if by sea;
And I on the opposite shore will be,
Ready to ride and spread the alarm
Through every Middlesex village and farm
For the country folk to be up and to arm,"

Then he said, "Good night!" and with muffled oar
Silently rowed to the Charlestown shore,
Just as the moon rose over the bay,
Where swinging wide at her moorings lay
The Somerset, British man-of-war;
A phantom ship, with each mast and spar
Across the moon like a prison bar,
And a huge black hulk, that was magnified
By its own reflection in the tide.

Meanwhile, his friend, through alley and street,
Wanders and watches with eager ears,
Till in the silence around him he hears
The muster of men at the barrack door,
The sound of arms, and the tramp of feet,
And the measured tread of the grenadiers,
Marching down to their boats on the shore.

Then he climbed the tower of the Old North Church,
By the wooden stairs, with stealthy tread,
To the belfry-chamber overhead,
And startled the pigeons from their perch
On the sombre rafters, that round him made
Masses and moving shapes of shade,--
By the trembling ladder, steep and tall
To the highest window in the wall,
Where he paused to listen and look down
A moment on the roofs of the town,
And the moonlight flowing over all.

Beneath, in the churchyard, lay the dead,
In their night-encampment on the hill,
Wrapped in silence so deep and still
That he could hear, like a sentinel's tread,
The watchful night-wind, as it went
Creeping along from tent to tent
And seeming to whisper, "All is well!"
A moment only he feels the spell
Of the place and the hour, and the secret dread
Of the lonely belfry and the dead;
For suddenly all his thoughts are bent
On a shadowy something far away,
Where the river widens to meet the bay,--
A line of black that bends and floats
On the rising tide, like a bridge of boats.

Meanwhile, impatient to mount and ride,
Booted and spurred, with a heavy stride
On the opposite shore walked Paul Revere.
Now he patted his horse's side,
Now gazed at the landscape far and near,
Then, impetuous, stamped the earth,
And turned and tightened his saddle-girth;
But mostly he watched with eager search
The belfry-tower of the Old North Church,
As it rose above the graves on the hill,
Lonely and spectral and sombre and still.
And lo! as he looks, on the belfry's height
A glimmer, and then a gleam of light!
He springs to the saddle, the bridle he turns,
But lingers and gazes, till full on his sight
A second lamp in the belfry burns!

A hurry of hoofs in a village street,
A shape in the moonlight, a bulk in the dark,
And beneath, from the pebbles, in passing, a spark
Struck out by a steed flying fearless and fleet:
That was all!  And yet, through the gloom and the light,
The fate of a nation was riding that night;
And the spark struck out by that steed, in his flight,
Kindled the land into flame with its heat.
He has left the village and mounted the steep,
And beneath him, tranquil and broad and deep,
Is the Mystic, meeting the ocean tides;
And under the alders, that skirt its edge,
Now soft on the sand, now loud on the ledge,
Is heard the tramp of his steed as he rides.

It was twelve by the village clock
When he crossed the bridge into Medford town.
He heard the crowing of the cock,
And the barking of the farmer's dog,
And felt the damp of the river fog,
That rises after the sun goes down.

It was one by the village clock,
When he galloped into Lexington.
He saw the gilded weathercock
Swim in the moonlight as he passed,
And the meeting-house windows, blank and bare,
Gaze at him with a spectral glare,
As if they already stood aghast
At the bloody work they would look upon.

It was two by the village clock,
When he came to the bridge in Concord town.
He heard the bleating of the flock,
And the twitter of birds among the trees,
And felt the breath of the morning breeze
Blowing over the meadows brown.
And one was safe and asleep in his bed
Who at the bridge would be first to fall,
Who that day would be lying dead,
Pierced by a British musket-ball.

You know the rest.  In the books you have read,
How the British Regulars fired and fled,--
How the farmers gave them ball for ball,
From behind each fence and farm-yard wall,
Chasing the red-coats down the lane,
Then crossing the fields to emerge again
Under the trees at the turn of the road,
And only pausing to fire and load.

So through the night rode Paul Revere;
And so through the night went his cry of alarm
To every Middlesex village and farm,--
A cry of defiance and not of fear,
A voice in the darkness, a knock at the door,
And a word that shall echo forevermore!
For, borne on the night-wind of the Past,
Through all our history, to the last,
In the hour of darkness and peril and need,
The people will waken and listen to hear
The hurrying hoof-beats of that steed,
And the midnight message of Paul Revere.



INTERLUDE.

The Landlord ended thus his tale,
Then rising took down from its nail
The sword that hung there, dim with dust
And cleaving to its sheath with rust,
And said, "This sword was in the fight."
The Poet seized it, and exclaimed,
"It is the sword of a good knight,
Though homespun was his coat-of-mail;
What matter if it be not named
Joyeuse, Colada, Durindale,
Excalibar, or Aroundight,
Or other name the books record?
Your ancestor, who bore this sword
As Colonel of the Volunteers,
Mounted upon his old gray mare,
Seen here and there and everywhere,
To me a grander shape appears
Than old Sir William, or what not,
Clinking about in foreign lands
With iron gauntlets on his hands,
And on his head an iron pot!"

All laughed; the Landlord's face grew red
As his escutcheon on the wall;
He could not comprehend at all
The drift of what the Poet said;
For those who had been longest dead
Were always greatest in his eyes;
And be was speechless with surprise
To see Sir William's plumed head
Brought to a level with the rest,
And made the subject of a jest.
And this perceiving, to appease
The Landlord's wrath, the others' fears,
The Student said, with careless ease,
"The ladies and the cavaliers,
The arms, the loves, the courtesies,
The deeds of high emprise, I sing!
Thus Ariosto says, in words
That have the stately stride and ring
Of armed knights and clashing swords.
Now listen to the tale I bring
Listen! though not to me belong
The flowing draperies of his song,
The words that rouse, the voice that charms.
The Landlord's tale was one of arms,
Only a tale of love is mine,
Blending the human and divine,
A tale of the Decameron, told
In Palmieri's garden old,
By Fiametta, laurel-crowned,
While her companions lay around,
And heard the intermingled sound
Of airs that on their errands sped,
And wild birds gossiping overhead,
And lisp of leaves, and fountain's fall,
And her own voice more sweet than all,
Telling the tale, which, wanting these,
Perchance may lose its power to please."



THE STUDENT'S TALE

THE FALCON OF SER FEDERIGO

One summer morning, when the sun was hot,
Weary with labor in his garden-plot,
On a rude bench beneath his cottage eaves,
Ser Federigo sat among the leaves
Of a huge vine, that, with its arms outspread,
Hung its delicious clusters overhead.
Below him, through the lovely valley flowed
The river Arno, like a winding road,
And from its banks were lifted high in air
The spires and roofs of Florence called the Fair;
To him a marble tomb, that rose above
His wasted fortunes and his buried love.
For there, in banquet and in tournament,
His wealth had lavished been, his substance spent,
To woo and lose, since ill his wooing sped,
Monna Giovanna, who his rival wed,
Yet ever in his fancy reigned supreme,
The ideal woman of a young man's dream.

Then he withdrew, in poverty and pain,
To this small farm, the last of his domain,
His only comfort and his only care
To prune his vines, and plant the fig and pear;
His only forester and only guest
His falcon, faithful to him, when the rest,
Whose willing hands had found so light of yore
The brazen knocker of his palace door,
Had now no strength to lift the wooden latch,
That entrance gave beneath a roof of thatch.
Companion of his solitary ways,
Purveyor of his feasts on holidays,
On him this melancholy man bestowed
The love with which his nature overflowed.

And so the empty-handed years went round,
Vacant, though voiceful with prophetic sound,
And so, that summer morn, he sat and mused
With folded, patient hands, as he was used,
And dreamily before his half-closed sight
Floated the vision of his lost delight.
Beside him, motionless, the drowsy bird
Dreamed of the chase, and in his slumber heard
The sudden, scythe-like sweep of wings, that dare
The headlong plunge thro' eddying gulfs of air,
Then, starting broad awake upon his perch,
Tinkled his bells, like mass-bells in a church,
And, looking at his master, seemed to say,
"Ser Federigo, shall we hunt to-day?"

Ser Federigo thought not of the chase;
The tender vision of her lovely face,
I will not say he seems to see, he sees
In the leaf-shadows of the trellises,
Herself, yet not herself; a lovely child
With flowing tresses, and eyes wide and wild,
Coming undaunted up the garden walk,
And looking not at him, but at the hawk.
"Beautiful falcon!" said he, "would that I
Might hold thee on my wrist, or see thee fly!"
The voice was hers, and made strange echoes start
Through all the haunted chambers of his heart,
As an aeolian harp through gusty doors
Of some old ruin its wild music pours.

"Who is thy mother, my fair boy?" he said,
His hand laid softly on that shining head.
"Monna Giovanna.  Will you let me stay
A little while, and with your falcon play?
We live there, just beyond your garden wall,
In the great house behind the poplars tall."

So he spake on; and Federigo heard
As from afar each softly uttered word,
And drifted onward through the golden gleams
And shadows of the misty sea of dreams,
As mariners becalmed through vapors drift,
And feel the sea beneath them sink and lift,
And hear far off the mournful breakers roar,
And voices calling faintly from the shore!
Then, waking from his pleasant reveries
He took the little boy upon his knees,
And told him stories of his gallant bird,
Till in their friendship he became a third.

Monna Giovanna, widowed in her prime,
Had come with friends to pass the summer time
In her grand villa, half-way up the hill,
O'erlooking Florence, but retired and still;
With iron gates, that opened through long lines
Of sacred ilex and centennial pines,
And terraced gardens, and broad steps of stone,
And sylvan deities, with moss o'ergrown,
And fountains palpitating in the heat,
And all Val d'Arno stretched beneath its feet.
Here in seclusion, as a widow may,
The lovely lady whiled the hours away,
Pacing in sable robes the statued hall,
Herself the stateliest statue among all,
And seeing more and more, with secret joy,
Her husband risen and living in her boy,
Till the lost sense of life returned again,
Not as delight, but as relief from pain.
Meanwhile the boy, rejoicing in his strength,
Stormed down the terraces from length to length;
The screaming peacock chased in hot pursuit,
And climbed the garden trellises for fruit.
But his chief pastime was to watch the flight
Of a gerfalcon, soaring into sight,
Beyond the trees that fringed the garden wall,
Then downward stooping at some distant call;
And as he gazed full often wondered he
Who might the master of the falcon be,
Until that happy morning, when he found
Master and falcon in the cottage ground.

And now a shadow and a terror fell
On the great house, as if a passing-bell
Tolled from the tower, and filled each spacious room
With secret awe, and preternatural gloom;
The petted boy grew ill, and day by day
Pined with mysterious malady away.
The mother's heart would not be comforted;
Her darling seemed to her already dead,
And often, sitting by the sufferer's side,
"What can I do to comfort thee?" she cried.
At first the silent lips made no reply,
But moved at length by her importunate cry,
"Give me," he answered, with imploring tone,
"Ser Federigo's falcon for my own!"
No answer could the astonished mother make;
How could she ask, e'en for her darling's sake,
Such favor at a luckless lover's hand,
Well knowing that to ask was to command?
Well knowing, what all falconers confessed,
In all the land that falcon was the best,
The master's pride and passion and delight,
And the sole pursuivant of this poor knight.
But yet, for her child's sake, she could no less
Than give assent to soothe his restlessness,
So promised, and then promising to keep
Her promise sacred, saw him fall asleep.

The morrow was a bright September morn;
The earth was beautiful as if new-born;
There was that nameless splendor everywhere,
That wild exhilaration in the air,
Which makes the passers in the city street
Congratulate each other as they meet.
Two lovely ladies, clothed in cloak and hood,
Passed through the garden gate into the wood,
Under the lustrous leaves, and through the sheen
Of dewy sunshine showering down between.

The one, close-hooded, had the attractive grace
Which sorrow sometimes lends a woman's face;
Her dark eyes moistened with the mists that roll
From the gulf-stream of passion in the soul;
The other with her hood thrown back, her hair
Making a golden glory in the air,
Her cheeks suffused with an auroral blush,
Her young heart singing louder than the thrush.
So walked, that morn, through mingled light and shade,
Each by the other's presence lovelier made,
Monna Giovanna and her bosom friend,
Intent upon their errand and its end.

They found Ser Federigo at his toil,
Like banished Adam, delving in the soil;
And when he looked and these fair women spied,
The garden suddenly was glorified;
His long-lost Eden was restored again,
And the strange river winding through the plain
No longer was the Arno to his eyes,
But the Euphrates watering Paradise!

Monna Giovanna raised her stately head,
And with fair words of salutation said:
"Ser Federigo, we come here as friends,
Hoping in this to make some poor amends
For past unkindness.  I who ne'er before
Would even cross the threshold of your door,
I who in happier days such pride maintained,
Refused your banquets, and your gifts disdained,
This morning come, a self-invited guest,
To put your generous nature to the test,
And breakfast with you under your own vine."
To which he answered: "Poor desert of mine,
Not your unkindness call it, for if aught
Is good in me of feeling or of thought,
From you it comes, and this last grace outweighs
All sorrows, all regrets of other days."

And after further compliment and talk,
Among the asters in the garden walk
He left his guests; and to his cottage turned,
And as he entered for a moment yearned
For the lost splendors of the days of old,
The ruby glass, the silver and the gold,
And felt how piercing is the sting of pride,
By want embittered and intensified.
He looked about him for some means or way
To keep this unexpected holiday;
Searched every cupboard, and then searched again,
Summoned the maid, who came, but came in vain;
"The Signor did not hunt to-day," she said,
"There's nothing in the house but wine and bread."

Then suddenly the drowsy falcon shook
His little bells, with that sagacious look,
Which said, as plain as language to the ear,
"If anything is wanting, I am here!"
Yes, everything is wanting, gallant bird!
The master seized thee without further word.
Like thine own lure, he whirled thee round; ah me!
The pomp and flutter of brave falconry,
The bells, the jesses, the bright scarlet hood,
The flight and the pursuit o'er field and wood,
All these forevermore are ended now;
No longer victor, but the victim thou!

Then on the board a snow-white cloth he spread,
Laid on its wooden dish the loaf of bread,
Brought purple grapes with autumn sunshine hot,
The fragrant peach, the juicy bergamot;
Then in the midst a flask of wine he placed,
And with autumnal flowers the banquet graced.
Ser Federigo, would not these suffice
Without thy falcon stuffed with cloves and spice?

When all was ready, and the courtly dame
With her companion to the cottage came,
Upon Ser Federigo's brain there fell
The wild enchantment of a magic spell!
The room they entered, mean and low and small,
Was changed into a sumptuous banquet-hall,
With fanfares by aerial trumpets blown;
The rustic chair she sat on was a throne;
He ate celestial food, and a divine
Flavor was given to his country wine,
And the poor falcon, fragrant with his spice,
A peacock was, or bird of paradise!

When the repast was ended, they arose
And passed again into the garden-close.
Then said the lady, "Far too well I know
Remembering still the days of long ago,
Though you betray it not with what surprise
You see me here in this familiar wise.
You have no children, and you cannot guess
What anguish, what unspeakable distress
A mother feels, whose child is lying ill,
Nor how her heart anticipates his will.
And yet for this, you see me lay aside
All womanly reserve and check of pride,
And ask the thing most precious in your sight,
Your falcon, your sole comfort and delight,
Which if you find it in your heart to give,
My poor, unhappy boy perchance may live."

Ser Federigo listens, and replies,
With tears of love and pity in his eyes:
"Alas, dear lady! there can be no task
So sweet to me, as giving when you ask.
One little hour ago, if I had known
This wish of yours, it would have been my own.
But thinking in what manner I could best
Do honor to the presence of my guest,
I deemed that nothing worthier could be
Than what most dear and precious was to me,
And so my gallant falcon breathed his last
To furnish forth this morning our repast."

In mute contrition, mingled with dismay,
The gentle lady tuned her eyes away,
Grieving that he such sacrifice should make,
And kill his falcon for a woman's sake,
Yet feeling in her heart a woman's pride,
That nothing she could ask for was denied;
Then took her leave, and passed out at the gate
With footstep slow and soul disconsolate.

Three days went by, and lo! a passing-bell
Tolled from the little chapel in the dell;
Ten strokes Ser Federigo heard, and said,
Breathing a prayer, "Alas! her child is dead!"
Three months went by; and lo! a merrier chime
Rang from the chapel bells at Christmas time;
The cottage was deserted, and no more
Ser Federigo sat beside its door,
But now, with servitors to do his will,
In the grand villa, half-way up the hill,
Sat at the Christmas feast, and at his side
Monna Giovanna, his beloved bride,
Never so beautiful, so kind, so fair,
Enthroned once more in the old rustic chair,
High-perched upon the back of which there stood
The image of a falcon carved in wood,
And underneath the inscription, with date,
"All things come round to him who will but wait."



INTERLUDE

Soon as the story reached its end,
One, over eager to commend,
Crowned it with injudicious praise;
And then the voice of blame found vent,
And fanned the embers of dissent
Into a somewhat lively blaze.

The Theologian shook his head;
"These old Italian tales," he said,
"From the much-praised Decameron down
Through all the rabble of the rest,
Are either trifling, dull, or lewd;
The gossip of a neighborhood
In some remote provincial town,
A scandalous chronicle at best!
They seem to me a stagnant fen,
Grown rank with rushes and with reeds,
Where a white lily, now and then,
Blooms in the midst of noxious weeds
And deadly nightshade on its banks."

To this the Student straight replied,
"For the white lily, many thanks!
One should not say, with too much pride,
Fountain, I will not drink of thee!
Nor were it grateful to forget,
That from these reservoirs and tanks
Even imperial Shakespeare drew
His Moor of Venice, and the Jew,
And Romeo and Juliet,
And many a famous comedy."

Then a long pause; till some one said,
"An Angel is flying overhead!"
At these words spake the Spanish Jew,
And murmured with an inward breath:
"God grant, if what you say be true,
It may not be the Angel of Death!"
And then another pause; and then,
Stroking his beard, he said again:
"This brings back to my memory
A story in the Talmud told,
That book of gems, that book of gold,
Of wonders many and manifold,
A tale that often comes to me,
And fills my heart, and haunts my brain,
And never wearies nor grows old."



THE SPANISH JEW'S TALE

THE LEGEND OF RABBI BEN LEVI

Rabbi Ben Levi, on the Sabbath, read
A volume of the Law, in which it said,
"No man shall look upon my face and live."
And as he read, he prayed that God would give
His faithful servant grace with mortal eye
To look upon His face and yet not die.

Then fell a sudden shadow on the page,
And, lifting up his eyes, grown dim with age
He saw the Angel of Death before him stand,
Holding a naked sword in his right hand.
Rabbi Ben Levi was a righteous man,
Yet through his veins a chill of terror ran.
With trembling voice he said, "What wilt thou here?"
The angel answered, "Lo! the time draws near
When thou must die; yet first, by God's decree,
Whate'er thou askest shall be granted thee."
Replied the Rabbi, "Let these living eyes
First look upon my place in Paradise."

Then said the Angel, "Come with me and look."
Rabbi Ben Levi closed the sacred book,
And rising, and uplifting his gray head,
"Give me thy sword," he to the Angel said,
"Lest thou shouldst fall upon me by the way."
The angel smiled and hastened to obey,
Then led him forth to the Celestial Town,
And set him on the wall, whence, gazing down,
Rabbi Ben Levi, with his living eyes,
Might look upon his place in Paradise.

Then straight into the city of the Lord
The Rabbi leaped with the Death-Angel's sword,
And through the streets there swept a sudden breath
Of something there unknown, which men call death.
Meanwhile the Angel stayed without and cried,
"Come back!"  To which the Rabbi's voice replied,
"No! in the name of God, whom I adore,
I swear that hence I will depart no more!"

Then all the Angels cried, "O Holy One,
See what the son of Levi here hath done!
The kingdom of Heaven he takes by violence,
And in Thy name refuses to go hence!"
The Lord replied, "My Angels, be not wroth;
Did e'er the son of Levi break his oath?
Let him remain; for he with mortal eye
Shall look upon my face and yet not die."

Beyond the outer wall the Angel of Death
Heard the great voice, and said, with panting breath,
"Give back the sword, and let me go my way."
Whereat the Rabbi paused, and answered, "Nay!
Anguish enough already hath it caused
Among the sons of men."  And while he paused
He heard the awful mandate of the Lord
Resounding through the air, "Give back the sword!"

The Rabbi bowed his head in silent prayer;
Then said he to the dreadful Angel, "Swear,
No human eye shall look on it again;
But when thou takest away the souls of men,
Thyself unseen, and with an unseen sword,
Thou wilt perform the bidding of the Lord."
The Angel took the sword again, and swore,
And walks on earth unseen forevermore.



INTERLUDE

He ended: and a kind of spell
Upon the silent listeners fell.
His solemn manner and his words
Had touched the deep, mysterious chords,
That vibrate in each human breast
Alike, but not alike confessed.
The spiritual world seemed near;
And close above them, full of fear,
Its awful adumbration passed,
A luminous shadow, vague and vast.
They almost feared to look, lest there,
Embodied from the impalpable air,
They might behold the Angel stand,
Holding the sword in his right hand.

At last, but in a voice subdued,
Not to disturb their dreamy mood,
Said the Sicilian: "While you spoke,
Telling your legend marvellous,
Suddenly in my memory woke
The thought of one, now gone from us,--
An old Abate, meek and mild,
My friend and teacher, when a child,
Who sometimes in those days of old
The legend of an Angel told,
Which ran, as I remember, thus?'



THE SICILIAN'S TALE

KING ROBERT OF SICILY

Robert of Sicily, brother of Pope Urbane
And Valmond, Emperor of Allemaine,
Apparelled in magnificent attire,
With retinue of many a knight and squire,
On St. John's eve, at vespers, proudly sat
And heard the priests chant the Magnificat,
And as he listened, o'er and o'er again
Repeated, like a burden or refrain,
He caught the words, "Deposuit potentes
De sede, et exaltavit humiles";
And slowly lifting up his kingly head
He to a learned clerk beside him said,
"What mean these words?"  The clerk made answer meet,
"He has put down the mighty from their seat,
And has exalted them of low degree."
Thereat King Robert muttered scornfully,
"'T is well that such seditious words are sung
Only by priests and in the Latin tongue;
For unto priests and people be it known,
There is no power can push me from my throne!"
And leaning back, he yawned and fell asleep,
Lulled by the chant monotonous and deep.

When he awoke, it was already night;
The church was empty, and there was no light,
Save where the lamps, that glimmered few and faint,
Lighted a little space before some saint.
He started from his seat and gazed around,
But saw no living thing and heard no sound.
He groped towards the door, but it was locked;
He cried aloud, and listened, and then knocked,
And uttered awful threatenings and complaints,
And imprecations upon men and saints.
The sounds re-echoed from the roof and walls
As if dead priests were laughing in their stalls.

At length the sexton, hearing from without
The tumult of the knocking and the shout,
And thinking thieves were in the house of prayer,
Came with his lantern, asking, "Who is there?"
Half choked with rage, King Robert fiercely said,
"Open: 'tis I, the King!  Art thou afraid?"
The frightened sexton, muttering, with a curse,
"This is some drunken vagabond, or worse!"
Turned the great key and flung the portal wide;
A man rushed by him at a single stride,
Haggard, half naked, without hat or cloak,
Who neither turned, nor looked at him, nor spoke,
But leaped into the blackness of the night,
And vanished like a spectre from his sight.

Robert of Sicily, brother of Pope Urbane
And Valmond, Emperor of Allemaine,
Despoiled of his magnificent attire,
Bareheaded, breathless, and besprent with mire,
With sense of wrong and outrage desperate,
Strode on and thundered at the palace gate;
Rushed through the courtyard, thrusting in his rage
To right and left each seneschal and page,
And hurried up the broad and sounding stair,
His white face ghastly in the torches' glare.
From hall to hall he passed with breathless speed;
Voices and cries he heard, but did not heed,
Until at last he reached the banquet-room,
Blazing with light and breathing with perfume.

There on the dais sat another king,
Wearing his robes, his crown, his signet-ring,
King Robert's self in features, form, and height,
But all transfigured with angelic light!
It was an Angel; and his presence there
With a divine effulgence filled the air,
An exaltation, piercing the disguise,
Though none the hidden Angel recognize.

A moment speechless, motionless, amazed,
The throneless monarch on the Angel gazed,
Who met his look of anger and surprise
With the divine compassion of his eyes;
Then said, "Who art thou? and why com'st thou here?"
To which King Robert answered, with a sneer,
"I am the King, and come to claim my own
From an impostor, who usurps my throne!"
And suddenly, at these audacious words,
Up sprang the angry guests, and drew their swords;
The Angel answered, with unruffled brow,
"Nay, not the King, but the King's Jester, thou
Henceforth shall wear the bells and scalloped cape,
And for thy counsellor shalt lead an ape;
Thou shalt obey my servants when they call,
And wait upon my henchmen in the hall!"

Deaf to King Robert's threats and cries and prayers,
They thrust him from the hall and down the stairs;
A group of tittering pages ran before,
And as they opened wide the folding door,
His heart failed, for he heard, with strange alarms,
The boisterous laughter of the men-at-arms,
And all the vaulted chamber roar and ring
With the mock plaudits of "Long live the King!"

Next morning, waking with the day's first beam,
He said within himself, "It was a dream!"
But the straw rustled as he turned his head,
There were the cap and bells beside his bed,
Around him rose the bare, discolored walls,
Close by, the steeds were champing in their stalls,
And in the corner, a revolting shape,
Shivering and chattering sat the wretched ape.
It was no dream; the world he loved so much
Had turned to dust and ashes at his touch!

Days came and went; and now returned again
To Sicily the old Saturnian reign;
Under the Angel's governance benign
The happy island danced with corn and wine,
And deep within the mountain's burning breast
Enceladus, the giant, was at rest.

Meanwhile King Robert yielded to his fate,
Sullen and silent and disconsolate.
Dressed in the motley garb that Jesters wear,
With look bewildered and a vacant stare,
Close shaven above the ears, as monks are shorn,
By courtiers mocked, by pages laughed to scorn,
His only friend the ape, his only food
What others left,--he still was unsubdued.
And when the Angel met him on his way,
And half in earnest, half in jest, would say
Sternly, though tenderly, that he might feel
The velvet scabbard held a sword of steel,
"Art thou the King?" the passion of his woe
Burst from him in resistless overflow,
And, lifting high his forehead, he would fling
The haughty answer back, "I am, I am the King!"

Almost three years were ended; when there came
Ambassadors of great repute and name
From Valmond, Emperor of Allemaine,
Unto King Robert, saying that Pope Urbane
By letter summoned them forthwith to come
On Holy Thursday to his city of Rome.
The Angel with great joy received his guests,
And gave them presents of embroidered vests,
And velvet mantles with rich ermine lined,
And rings and jewels of the rarest kind.
Then he departed with them o'er the sea
Into the lovely land of Italy,
Whose loveliness was more resplendent made
By the mere passing of that cavalcade,
With plumes, and cloaks, and housings, and the stir
Of jewelled bridle and of golden spur.
And lo! among the menials, in mock state,
Upon a piebald steed, with shambling gait,
His cloak of fox-tails flapping in the wind,
The solemn ape demurely perched behind,
King Robert rode, making huge merriment
In all the country towns through which they went.

The Pope received them with great pomp and blare
Of bannered trumpets, on Saint Peter's square,
Giving his benediction and embrace,
Fervent, and full of apostolic grace.
While with congratulations and with prayers
He entertained the Angel unawares,
Robert, the Jester, bursting through the crowd,
Into their presence rushed, and cried aloud,
"I am the King!  Look, and behold in me
Robert, your brother, King of Sicily!
This man, who wears my semblance to your eyes,
Is an impostor in a king's disguise.
Do you not know me? does no voice within
Answer my cry, and say we are akin?"
The Pope in silence, but with troubled mien,
Gazed at the Angel's countenance serene;
The Emperor, laughing, said, "It is strange sport
To keep a mad man for thy Fool at court!"
And the poor, baffled Jester in disgrace
Was hustled back among the populace.

In solemn state the Holy Week went by,
And Easter Sunday gleamed upon the sky;
The presence of the Angel, with its light,
Before the sun rose, made the city bright,
And with new fervor filled the hearts of men,
Who felt that Christ indeed had risen again.
Even the Jester, on his bed of straw,
With haggard eyes the unwonted splendor saw,
He felt within a power unfelt before,
And, kneeling humbly on his chamber floor,
He heard the rushing garments of the Lord
Sweep through the silent air, ascending heavenward.

And now the visit ending, and once more
Valmond returning to the Danube's shore,
Homeward the Angel journeyed, and again
The land was made resplendent with his train,
Flashing along the towns of Italy
Unto Salerno, and from thence by sea.
And when once more within Palermo's wall,
And, seated on the throne in his great hall,
He heard the Angelus from convent towers,
As if the better world conversed with ours,
He beckoned to King Robert to draw nigher,
And with a gesture bade the rest retire;
And when they were alone, the Angel said,
"Art thou the King?"  Then, bowing down his head,
King Robert crossed both hands upon his breast,
And meekly answered him: "Thou knowest best!
My sins as scarlet are; let me go hence,
And in some cloister's school of penitence,
Across those stones, that pave the way to heaven,
Walk barefoot, till my guilty soul be shriven!"

The Angel smiled, and from his radiant face
A holy light illumined all the place,
And through the open window, loud and clear,
They heard the monks chant in the chapel near,
Above the stir and tumult of the street:
"He has put down the mighty from their seat,
And has exalted them of low degree!"
And through the chant a second melody
Rose like the throbbing of a single string:
"I am an Angel, and thou art the King!"

King Robert, who was standing near the throne,
Lifted his eyes, and lo! he was alone!
But all apparelled as in days of old,
With ermined mantle and with cloth of gold;
And when his courtiers came, they found him there
Kneeling upon the floor, absorbed in, silent prayer.



INTERLUDE

And then the blue-eyed Norseman told
A Saga of the days of old.
"There is," said he, "a wondrous book
Of Legends in the old Norse tongue,
Of the dead kings of Norroway,--
Legends that once were told or sung
In many a smoky fireside nook
Of Iceland, in the ancient day,
By wandering Saga-man or Scald;
Heimskringla is the volume called;
And he who looks may find therein
The story that I now begin."

And in each pause the story made
Upon his violin he played,
As an appropriate interlude,
Fragments of old Norwegian tunes
That bound in one the separate runes,
And held the mind in perfect mood,
Entwining and encircling all
The strange and antiquated rhymes
with melodies of olden times;
As over some half-ruined wall,
Disjointed and about to fall,
Fresh woodbines climb and interlace,
And keep the loosened stones in place.



THE MUSICIAN'S TALE

THE SAGA OF KING OLAF

I

THE CHALLENGE OF THOR

I am the God Thor,
I am the War God,
I am the Thunderer!
Here in my Northland,
My fastness and fortress,
Reign I forever!

Here amid icebergs
Rule I the nations;
This is my hammer,
Miolner the mighty;
Giants and sorcerers
Cannot withstand it!

These are the gauntlets
Wherewith I wield it,
And hurl it afar off;
This is my girdle;
Whenever I brace it,
Strength is redoubled!

The light thou beholdest
Stream through the heavens,
In flashes of crimson,
Is but my red beard
Blown by the night-wind,
Affrighting the nations!

Jove is my brother;
Mine eyes are the lightning;
The wheels of my chariot
Roll in the thunder,
The blows of my hammer
Ring in the earthquake!

Force rules the world still,
Has ruled it, shall rule it;
Meekness is weakness,
Strength is triumphant,
Over the whole earth
Still is it Thor's-Day!

Thou art a God too,
O Galilean!
And thus single-handed
Unto the combat,
Gauntlet or Gospel,
Here I defy thee!



II

KING OLAF'S RETURN

And King Olaf heard the cry,
Saw the red light in the sky,
  Laid his hand upon his sword,
As he leaned upon the railing,
And his ships went sailing, sailing
  Northward into Drontheim fiord.

There he stood as one who dreamed;
And the red light glanced and gleamed
  On the armor that he wore;
And he shouted, as the rifled
Streamers o'er him shook and shifted,
  "I accept thy challenge, Thor!"

To avenge his father slain,
And reconquer realm and reign,
  Came the youthful Olaf home,
Through the midnight sailing, sailing,
Listening to the wild wind's wailing,
  And the dashing of the foam.

To his thoughts the sacred name
Of his mother Astrid came,
  And the tale she oft had told
Of her flight by secret passes
Through the mountains and morasses,
  To the home of Hakon old.

Then strange memories crowded back
Of Queen Gunhild's wrath and wrack,
  And a hurried flight by sea;
Of grim Vikings, and the rapture
Of the sea-fight, and the capture,
  And the life of slavery.

How a stranger watched his face
In the Esthonian market-place,
  Scanned his features one by one,
Saying, "We should know each other;
I am Sigurd, Astrid's brother,
  Thou art Olaf, Astrid's son!"

Then as Queen Allogia's page,
Old in honors, young in age,
  Chief of all her men-at-arms;
Till vague whispers, and mysterious,
Reached King Valdemar, the imperious,
  Filling him with strange alarms.

Then his cruisings o'er the seas,
Westward to the Hebrides,
  And to Scilly's rocky shore;
And the hermit's cavern dismal,
Christ's great name and rites baptismal
  in the ocean's rush and roar.

All these thoughts of love and strife
Glimmered through his lurid life,
  As the stars' intenser light
Through the red flames o'er him trailing,
As his ships went sailing, sailing,
  Northward in the summer night.

Trained for either camp or court,
Skilful in each manly sport,
  Young and beautiful and tall;
Art of warfare, craft of chases,
Swimming, skating, snow-shoe races
  Excellent alike in all.

When at sea, with all his rowers,
He along the bending oars
  Outside of his ship could run.
He the Smalsor Horn ascended,
And his shining shield suspended,
On its summit, like a sun.

On the ship-rails he could stand,
Wield his sword with either hand,
  And at once two javelins throw;
At all feasts where ale was strongest
Sat the merry monarch longest,
  First to come and last to go.

Norway never yet had seen
One so beautiful of mien,
  One so royal in attire,
When in arms completely furnished,
Harness gold-inlaid and burnished,
  Mantle like a flame of fire.

Thus came Olaf to his own,
When upon the night-wind blown
  Passed that cry along the shore;
And he answered, while the rifted
Streamers o'er him shook and shifted,
  "I accept thy challenge, Thor!"



III

THORA OF RIMOL

"Thora of Rimol! hide me! hide me!
Danger and shame and death betide me!
For Olaf the King is hunting me down
Through field and forest, through thorp and town!"
    Thus cried Jarl Hakon
    To Thora, the fairest of women.

Hakon Jarl! for the love I bear thee
Neither shall shame nor death come near thee!
But the hiding-place wherein thou must lie
Is the cave underneath the swine in the sty."
    Thus to Jarl Hakon
    Said Thora, the fairest of women.

So Hakon Jarl and his base thrall Karker
Crouched in the cave, than a dungeon darker,
As Olaf came riding, with men in mail,
Through the forest roads into Orkadale,
    Demanding Jarl Hakon
    Of Thora, the fairest of women.

"Rich and honored shall be whoever
The head of Hakon Jarl shall dissever!"
Hakon heard him, and Karker the slave,
Through the breathing-holes of the darksome cave.
    Alone in her chamber
    Wept Thora, the fairest of women.

Said Karker, the crafty, "I will not slay thee!
For all the king's gold I will never betray thee!"
"Then why dost thou turn so pale, O churl,
And then again black as the earth?" said the Earl.
    More pale and more faithful
    Was Thora, the fairest of women.

From a dream in the night the thrall started, saying,
"Round my neck a gold ring King Olaf was laying!"
And Hakon answered, "Beware of the king!
He will lay round thy neck a blood-red ring."
    At the ring on her finger
    Gazed Thora, the fairest of women.

At daybreak slept Hakon, with sorrows encumbered,
But screamed and drew up his feet as he slumbered;
The thrall in the darkness plunged with his knife,
And the Earl awakened no more in this life.
    But wakeful and weeping
    Sat Thora, the fairest of women.

At Nidarholm the priests are all singing,
Two ghastly heads on the gibbet are swinging;
One is Jarl Hakon's and one is his thrall's,
And the people are shouting from windows and walls;
    While alone in her chamber
    Swoons Thora, the fairest of women.



IV

QUEEN SIGRID THE HAUGHTY

Queen Sigrid the Haughty sat proud and aloft
In her chamber, that looked over meadow and croft.
    Heart's dearest,
    Why dost thou sorrow so?

The floor with tassels of fir was besprent,
Filling the room with their fragrant scent.

She heard the birds sing, she saw the sun shine,
The air of summer was sweeter than wine.

Like a sword without scabbard the bright river lay
Between her own kingdom and Norroway.

But Olaf the King had sued for her hand,
The sword would be sheathed, the river be spanned.

Her maidens were seated around her knee,
Working bright figures in tapestry.

And one was singing the ancient rune
Of Brynhilda's love and the wrath of Gudrun.

And through it, and round it, and over it all
Sounded incessant the waterfall.

The Queen in her hand held a ring of gold,
From the door of Lade's Temple old.

King Olaf had sent her this wedding gift,
But her thoughts as arrows were keen and swift.

She had given the ring to her goldsmiths twain,
Who smiled, as they handed it back again.

And Sigrid the Queen, in her haughty way,
Said, "Why do you smile, my goldsmiths, say?"

And they answered: "O Queen! if the truth must be told,
The ring is of copper, and not of gold!"

The lightning flashed o'er her forehead and cheek,
She only murmured, she did not speak:

"If in his gifts he can faithless be,
There will be no gold in his love to me."

A footstep was heard on the outer stair,
And in strode King Olaf with royal air.

He kissed the Queen's hand, and he whispered of love,
And swore to be true as the stars are above.

But she smiled with contempt as she answered: "O King,
Will you swear it, as Odin once swore, on the ring?"

And the King: "O speak not of Odin to me,
The wife of King Olaf a Christian must be."

Looking straight at the King, with her level brows,
She said, "I keep true to my faith and my vows."

Then the face of King Olaf was darkened with gloom,
He rose in his anger and strode through the room.

"Why, then, should I care to have thee?" he said,--
"A faded old woman, a heathenish jade!"

His zeal was stronger than fear or love,
And he struck the Queen in the face with his glove.

Then forth from the chamber in anger he fled,
And the wooden stairway shook with his tread.

Queen Sigrid the Haughty said under her breath,
"This insult, King Olaf, shall be thy death!"
    Heart's dearest,
    Why dost thou sorrow so?



V

THE SKERRY OF SHRIEKS

Now from all King Olaf's farms
    His men-at-arms
Gathered on the Eve of Easter;
To his house at Angvalds-ness
    Fast they press,
Drinking with the royal feaster.

Loudly through the wide-flung door
    Came the roar
Of the sea upon the Skerry;
And its thunder loud and near
    Reached the ear,
Mingling with their voices merry.

"Hark!" said Olaf to his Scald,
    Halfred the Bald,
"Listen to that song, and learn it!
Half my kingdom would I give,
    As I live,
If by such songs you would earn it!

"For of all the runes and rhymes
    Of all times,
Best I like the ocean's dirges,
When the old harper heaves and rocks,
    His hoary locks
Flowing and flashing in the surges!"

Halfred answered: "I am called
    The Unappalled!
Nothing hinders me or daunts me.
Hearken to me, then, O King,
    While I sing
The great Ocean Song that haunts me."

"I will hear your song sublime
    Some other time,"
Says the drowsy monarch, yawning,
And retires; each laughing guest
    Applauds the jest;
Then they sleep till day is dawning.

Facing up and down the yard,
    King Olaf's guard
Saw the sea-mist slowly creeping
O'er the sands, and up the hill,
    Gathering still
Round the house where they were sleeping.

It was not the fog he saw,
    Nor misty flaw,
That above the landscape brooded;
It was Eyvind Kallda's crew
    Of warlocks blue
With their caps of darkness hooded!

Round and round the house they go,
    Weaving slow
Magic circles to encumber
And imprison in their ring
    Olaf the King,
As he helpless lies in slumber.

Then athwart the vapors dun
    The Easter sun
Streamed with one broad track of splendor!
in their real forms appeared
    The warlocks weird,
Awful as the Witch of Endor.

Blinded by the light that glared,
    They groped and stared
Round about with steps unsteady;
From his window Olaf gazed,
    And, amazed,
"Who are these strange people?" said he.

"Eyvind Kallda and his men!"
    Answered then
From the yard a sturdy farmer;
While the men-at-arms apace
    Filled the place,
Busily buckling on their armor.

From the gates they sallied forth,
    South and north,
Scoured the island coast around them,
Seizing all the warlock band,
    Foot and hand
On the Skerry's rocks they bound them.

And at eve the king again
    Called his train,
And, with all the candles burning,
Silent sat and heard once more
    The sullen roar
Of the ocean tides returning.

Shrieks and cries of wild despair
    Filled the air,
Growing fainter as they listened;
Then the bursting surge alone
    Sounded on;--
Thus the sorcerers were christened!

"Sing, O Scald, your song sublime,
    Your ocean-rhyme,"
Cried King Olaf: "it will cheer me!"
Said the Scald, with pallid cheeks,
    "The Skerry of Shrieks
Sings too loud for you to hear me!"



VI

THE WRAITH OF ODIN

The guests were loud, the ale was strong,
King Olaf feasted late and long;
The hoary Scalds together sang;
O'erhead the smoky rafters rang.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

The door swung wide, with creak and din;
A blast of cold night-air came in,
And on the threshold shivering stood
A one-eyed guest, with cloak and hood.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

The King exclaimed, "O graybeard pale!
Come warm thee with this cup of ale."
The foaming draught the old man quaffed,
The noisy guests looked on and laughed.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

Then spake the King: "Be not afraid;
Sit here by me."  The guest obeyed,
And, seated at the table, told
Tales of the sea, and Sagas old.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

And ever, when the tale was o'er,
The King demanded yet one more;
Till Sigurd the Bishop smiling said,
"'T is late, O King, and time for bed."
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

The King retired; the stranger guest
Followed and entered with the rest;
The lights were out, the pages gone,
But still the garrulous guest spake on.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

As one who from a volume reads,
He spake of heroes and their deeds,
Of lands and cities he had seen,
And stormy gulfs that tossed between.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

Then from his lips in music rolled
The Havamal of Odin old,
With sounds mysterious as the roar
Of billows on a distant shore.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

"Do we not learn from runes and rhymes
Made by the gods in elder times,
And do not still the great Scalds teach
That silence better is than speech?"
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

Smiling at this, the King replied,
"Thy lore is by thy tongue belied;
For never was I so enthralled
Either by Saga-man or Scald,"
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

The Bishop said, "Late hours we keep!
Night wanes, O King! 't is time for sleep!"
Then slept the King, and when he woke
The guest was gone, the morning broke.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

They found the doors securely barred,
They found the watch-dog in the yard,
There was no footprint in the grass,
And none had seen the stranger pass.
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.

King Olaf crossed himself and said:
"I know that Odin the Great is dead;
Sure is the triumph of our Faith,
The one-eyed stranger was his wraith."
    Dead rides Sir Morten of Fogelsang.



VII

IRON-BEARD

    Olaf the King, one summer morn,
    Blew a blast on his bugle-horn,
Sending his signal through the land of Drontheim.

    And to the Hus-Ting held at Mere
    Gathered the farmers far and near,
With their war weapons ready to confront him.

    Ploughing under the morning star,
    Old Iron-Beard in Yriar
Heard the summons, chuckling with a low laugh.

    He wiped the sweat-drops from his brow,
    Unharnessed his horses from the plough,
And clattering came on horseback to King Olaf.

    He was the churliest of the churls;
    Little he cared for king or earls;
Bitter as home-brewed ale were his foaming passions.

    Hodden-gray was the garb he wore,
    And by the Hammer of Thor he swore;
He hated the narrow town, and all its fashions.

    But he loved the freedom of his farm,
    His ale at night, by the fireside warm,
Gudrun his daughter, with her flaxen tresses.

    He loved his horses and his herds,
    The smell of the earth, and the song of birds,
His well-filled barns, his brook with its water-cresses.

    Huge and cumbersome was his frame;
    His beard, from which he took his name,
Frosty and fierce, like that of Hymer the Giant.

    So at the Hus-Ting he appeared,
    The farmer of Yriar, Iron-Beard,
On horseback, in an attitude defiant.

    And to King Olaf he cried aloud,
    Out of the middle of the crowd,
That tossed about him like a stormy ocean:

    "Such sacrifices shalt thou bring;
    To Odin and to Thor, O King,
As other kings have done in their devotion!"

    King Olaf answered: "I command
    This land to be a Christian land;
Here is my Bishop who the folk baptizes!

    "But if you ask me to restore
    Your sacrifices, stained with gore,
Then will I offer human sacrifices!

    "Not slaves and peasants shall they be,
    But men of note and high degree,
Such men as Orm of Lyra and Kar of Gryting!"

   Then to their Temple strode he in,
   And loud behind him heard the din
Of his men-at-arms and the peasants fiercely fighting.

    There in the Temple, carved in wood,
    The image of great Odin stood,
And other gods, with Thor supreme among them.

    King Olaf smote them with the blade
    Of his huge war-axe, gold inlaid,
And downward shattered to the pavement flung them.

    At the same moment rose without,
    From the contending crowd, a shout,
A mingled sound of triumph and of wailing.

    And there upon the trampled plain
    The farmer iron-Beard lay slain,
Midway between the assailed and the assailing.

    King Olaf from the doorway spoke.
    "Choose ye between two things, my folk,
To be baptized or given up to slaughter!"

    And seeing their leader stark and dead,
    The people with a murmur said,
"O King, baptize us with thy holy water";

    So all the Drontheim land became
    A Christian land in name and fame,
In the old gods no more believing and trusting.

    And as a blood-atonement, soon
    King Olaf wed the fair Gudrun;
And thus in peace ended the Drontheim Hus-Ting!



VIII

GUDRUN

On King Olaf's bridal night
Shines the moon with tender light,
And across the chamber streams
    Its tide of dreams.

At the fatal midnight hour,
When all evil things have power,
In the glimmer of the moon
    Stands Gudrun.

Close against her heaving breast
Something in her hand is pressed
Like an icicle, its sheen
    Is cold and keen.

On the cairn are fixed her eyes
Where her murdered father lies,
And a voice remote and drear
    She seems to hear.

What a bridal night is this!
Cold will be the dagger's kiss;
Laden with the chill of death
    Is its breath.

Like the drifting snow she sweeps
To the couch where Olaf sleeps;
Suddenly he wakes and stirs,
    His eyes meet hers.

"What is that," King Olaf said,
"Gleams so bright above thy head?
Wherefore standest thou so white
    In pale moonlight?"

"'T is the bodkin that I wear
When at night I bind my hair;
It woke me falling on the floor;
    'T is nothing more."

"Forests have ears, and fields have eyes;
Often treachery lurking lies
Underneath the fairest hair!
    Gudrun beware!"

Ere the earliest peep of morn
Blew King Olaf's bugle-horn;
And forever sundered ride
    Bridegroom and bride!



IX

THANGBRAND THE PRIEST

Short of stature, large of limb,
  Burly face and russet beard,
All the women stared at him,
  When in Iceland he appeared.
    "Look!" they said,
    With nodding head,
"There goes Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest."

All the prayers he knew by rote,
  He could preach like Chrysostome,
From the Fathers he could quote,
  He had even been at Rome,
    A learned clerk,
    A man of mark,
Was this Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest,

He was quarrelsome and loud,
  And impatient of control,
Boisterous in the market crowd,
  Boisterous at the wassail-bowl,
    Everywhere
    Would drink and swear,
Swaggering Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest

In his house this malcontent
  Could the King no longer bear,
So to Iceland he was sent
  To convert the heathen there,
    And away
    One summer day
Sailed this Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.

There in Iceland, o'er their books
  Pored the people day and night,
But he did not like their looks,
  Nor the songs they used to write.
    "All this rhyme
    Is waste of time!"
Grumbled Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.

To the alehouse, where he sat
  Came the Scalds and Saga-men;
Is it to be wondered at,
  That they quarrelled now and then,
    When o'er his beer
    Began to leer
Drunken Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest?

All the folk in Altafiord
  Boasted of their island grand;
Saying in a single word,
  "Iceland is the finest land
    That the sun
    Doth shine upon!"
Loud laughed Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.

And he answered: "What's the use
  Of this bragging up and down,
When three women and one goose
  Make a market in your town!"
    Every Scald
    Satires scrawled
On poor Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.

Something worse they did than that;
  And what vexed him most of all
Was a figure in shovel hat,
  Drawn in charcoal on the wall;
    With words that go
    Sprawling below,
"This is Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest."

Hardly knowing what he did,
  Then he smote them might and main,
Thorvald Veile and Veterlid
  Lay there in the alehouse slain.
    "To-day we are gold,
    To-morrow mould!"
Muttered Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.

Much in fear of axe and rope,
  Back to Norway sailed he then.
"O, King Olaf! little hope
  Is there of these Iceland men!"
    Meekly said,
    With bending head,
Pious Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest.


X

RAUD THE STRONG

"All the old gods are dead,
All the wild warlocks fled;
But the White Christ lives and reigns,
And throughout my wide domains
His Gospel shall be spread!"
    On the Evangelists
    Thus swore King Olaf.

But still in dreams of the night
Beheld he the crimson light,
And heard the voice that defied
Him who was crucified,
And challenged him to the fight.
    To Sigurd the Bishop
    King Olaf confessed it.

And Sigurd the Bishop said,
"The old gods are not dead,
For the great Thor still reigns,
And among the Jarls and Thanes
The old witchcraft still is spread."
    Thus to King Olaf
    Said Sigurd the Bishop.

"Far north in the Salten Fiord,
By rapine, fire, and sword,
Lives the Viking, Raud the Strong;
All the Godoe Isles belong
To him and his heathen horde."
   Thus went on speaking
   Sigurd the Bishop.

"A warlock, a wizard is he,
And lord of the wind and the sea;
And whichever way he sails,
He has ever favoring gales,
By his craft in sorcery."
    Here the sign of the cross
    Made devoutly King Olaf.

"With rites that we both abhor,
He worships Odin and Thor;
So it cannot yet be said,
That all the old gods are dead,
And the warlocks are no more,"
    Flushing with anger
    Said Sigurd the Bishop.

Then King Olaf cried aloud:
"I will talk with this mighty Raud,
And along the Salten Fiord
Preach the Gospel with my sword,
Or be brought back in my shroud!"
    So northward from Drontheim
    Sailed King Olaf!



XI

BISHOP SIGURD AT SALTEN FIORD

Loud the angry wind was wailing
As King Olaf's ships came sailing
Northward out of Drontheim haven
   To the mouth of Salten Fiord.

Though the flying sea-spray drenches
Fore and aft the rowers' benches,
Not a single heart is craven
    Of the champions there on board.

All without the Fiord was quiet
But within it storm and riot,
Such as on his Viking cruises
    Raud the Strong was wont to ride.

And the sea through all its tide-ways
Swept the reeling vessels sideways,
As the leaves are swept through sluices,
    When the flood-gates open wide.

"'T is the warlock! 't is the demon
Raud!" cried Sigurd to the seamen;
"But the Lord is not affrighted
    By the witchcraft of his foes."

To the ship's bow he ascended,
By his choristers attended,
Round him were the tapers lighted,
    And the sacred incense rose.

On the bow stood Bishop Sigurd,
In his robes, as one transfigured,
And the Crucifix he planted
    High amid the rain and mist.

Then with holy water sprinkled
All the ship; the mass-bells tinkled;
Loud the monks around him chanted,
    Loud he read the Evangelist.

As into the Fiord they darted,
On each side the water parted;
Down a path like silver molten
    Steadily rowed King Olaf's ships;

Steadily burned all night the tapers,
And the White Christ through the vapors
Gleamed across the Fiord of Salten,
    As through John's Apocalypse,--

Till at last they reached Raud's dwelling
On the little isle of Gelling;
Not a guard was at the doorway,
    Not a glimmer of light was seen.

But at anchor, carved and gilded,
Lay the dragon-ship he builded;
'T was the grandest ship in Norway,
    With its crest and scales of green.

Up the stairway, softly creeping,
To the loft where Raud was sleeping,
With their fists they burst asunder
    Bolt and bar that held the door.

Drunken with sleep and ale they found him,
Dragged him from his bed and bound him,
While he stared with stupid wonder,
    At the look and garb they wore.

Then King Olaf said: "O Sea-King!
Little time have we for speaking,
Choose between the good and evil;
    Be baptized, or thou shalt die!

But in scorn the heathen scoffer
Answered: "I disdain thine offer;
Neither fear I God nor Devil;
    Thee and thy Gospel I defy!"

Then between his jaws distended,
When his frantic struggles ended,
Through King Olaf's horn an adder,
    Touched by fire, they forced to glide.

Sharp his tooth was as an arrow,
As he gnawed through bone and marrow;
But without a groan or shudder,
    Raud the Strong blaspheming died.

Then baptized they all that region,
Swarthy Lap and fair Norwegian,
Far as swims the salmon, leaping,
    Up the streams of Salten Fiord.

In their temples Thor and Odin
Lay in dust and ashes trodden,
As King Olaf, onward sweeping,
    Preached the Gospel with his sword.

Then he took the carved and gilded
Dragon-ship that Raud had builded,
And the tiller single-handed,
    Grasping, steered into the main.

Southward sailed the sea-gulls o'er him,
Southward sailed the ship that bore him,
Till at Drontheim haven landed
    Olaf and his crew again.




XII

KING OLAF'S CHRISTMAS

At Drontheim, Olaf the King
Heard the bells of Yule-tide ring,
    As he sat in his banquet-hall,
Drinking the nut-brown ale,
With his bearded Berserks hale
    And tall.

Three days his Yule-tide feasts
He held with Bishops and Priests,
    And his horn filled up to the brim;
But the ale was never too strong,
Nor the Saga-man's tale too long,
    For him.

O'er his drinking-horn, the sign
He made of the cross divine,
As he drank, and muttered his prayers;
But the Berserks evermore
Made the sign of the Hammer of Thor
    Over theirs.

The gleams of the fire-light dance
Upon helmet and hauberk and lance,
    And laugh in the eyes of the King;
And he cries to Halfred the Scald,
Gray-bearded, wrinkled, and bald,
    "Sing!"

"Sing me a song divine,
With a sword in every line,
    And this shall be thy reward."
And he loosened the belt at his waist,
And in front of the singer placed
    His sword.

"Quern-biter of Hakon the Good,
Wherewith at a stroke he hewed
    The millstone through and through,
And Foot-breadth of Thoralf the Strong,
Were neither so broad nor so long,
    Nor so true."

Then the Scald took his harp and sang,
And loud though the music rang
    The sound of that shining word;
And the harp-strings a clangor made,
As if they were struck with the blade
    Of a sword.

And the Berserks round about
Broke forth into a shout
    That made the rafters ring:
They smote with their fists on the board,
And shouted, "Long live the Sword,
    And the King!"

But the King said, "O my son,
I miss the bright word in one
    Of thy measures and thy rhymes."
And Halfred the Scald replied,
"In another 't was multiplied
    Three times."

Then King Olaf raised the hilt
Of iron, cross-shaped and gilt,
    And said, "Do not refuse;
Count well the gain and the loss,
Thor's hammer or Christ's cross:
    Choose!"

And Halfred the Scald said, "This
In the name of the Lord I kiss,
    Who on it was crucified!"
And a shout went round the board,
"In the name of Christ the Lord,
    Who died!"

Then over the waste of snows
The noonday sun uprose,
    Through the driving mists revealed,
Like the lifting of the Host,
By incense-clouds almost
    Concealed.

On the shining wall a vast
And shadowy cross was cast
    From the hilt of the lifted sword,
And in foaming cups of ale
The Berserks drank "Was-hael!
    To the Lord!"



XIII

THE BUILDING OF THE LONG SERPENT

Thorberg Skafting, master-builder,
    In his ship-yard by the sea,
Whistling, said, "It would bewilder
Any man but Thorberg Skafting,
    Any man but me!"

Near him lay the Dragon stranded,
    Built of old by Raud the Strong,
And King Olaf had commanded
He should build another Dragon,
    Twice as large and long.

Therefore whistled Thorberg Skafting,
    As he sat with half-closed eyes,
And his head turned sideways, drafting
That new vessel for King Olaf
    Twice the Dragon's size.

Round him busily hewed and hammered
    Mallet huge and heavy axe;
Workmen laughed and sang and clamored;
Whirred the wheels, that into rigging
    Spun the shining flax!

All this tumult heard the master,--
    It was music to his ear;
Fancy whispered all the faster,
"Men shall hear of Thorberg Skafting
    For a hundred year!"

Workmen sweating at the forges
    Fashioned iron bolt and bar,
Like a warlock's midnight orgies
Smoked and bubbled the black caldron
    With the boiling tar.

Did the warlocks mingle in it,
    Thorberg Skafting, any curse?
Could you not be gone a minute
But some mischief must be doing,
    Turning bad to worse?

'T was an ill wind that came wafting,
    From his homestead words of woe
To his farm went Thorberg Skafting,
Oft repeating to his workmen,
    Build ye thus and so.

After long delays returning
    Came the master back by night
To his ship-yard longing, yearning,
Hurried he, and did not leave it
    Till the morning's light.

"Come and see my ship, my darling"
    On the morrow said the King;
"Finished now from keel to carling;
Never yet was seen in Norway
    Such a wondrous thing!"

In the ship-yard, idly talking,
    At the ship the workmen stared:
Some one, all their labor balking,
Down her sides had cut deep gashes,
    Not a plank was spared!

"Death be to the evil-doer!"
    With an oath King Olaf spoke;
"But rewards to his pursuer
And with wrath his face grew redder
    Than his scarlet cloak.

Straight the master-builder, smiling,
    Answered thus the angry King:
"Cease blaspheming and reviling,
Olaf, it was Thorberg Skafting
    Who has done this thing!"

Then he chipped and smoothed the planking,
    Till the King, delighted, swore,
With much lauding and much thanking,
"Handsomer is now my Dragon
    Than she was before!"

Seventy ells and four extended
    On the grass the vessel's keel;
High above it, gilt and splendid,
Rose the figure-head ferocious
    With its crest of steel.

Then they launched her from the tressels,
    In the ship-yard by the sea;
She was the grandest of all vessels,
Never ship was built in Norway
    Half so fine as she!

The Long Serpent was she christened,
    'Mid the roar of cheer on cheer!
They who to the Saga listened
Heard the name of Thorberg Skafting
    For a hundred year!



XIV

THE CREW OF THE LONG SERPENT

Safe at anchor in Drontheim bay
King Olaf's fleet assembled lay,
  And, striped with white and blue,
Downward fluttered sail and banner,
As alights the screaming lanner;
Lustily cheered, in their wild manner,
  The Long Serpent's crew

Her forecastle man was Ulf the Red,
Like a wolf's was his shaggy head,
  His teeth as large and white;
His beard, of gray and russet blended,
Round as a swallow's nest descended;
As standard-bearer he defended
  Olaf's flag in the fight.

Near him Kolbiorn had his place,
Like the King in garb and face,
  So gallant and so hale;
Every cabin-boy and varlet
Wondered at his cloak of scarlet;
Like a river, frozen and star-lit,
  Gleamed his coat of mail.

By the bulkhead, tall and dark,
Stood Thrand Rame of Thelemark,
A figure gaunt and grand;
On his hairy arm imprinted
Was an anchor, azure-tinted;
Like Thor's hammer, huge and dinted
Was his brawny hand.

Einar Tamberskelver, bare
To the winds his golden hair,
  By the mainmast stood;
Graceful was his form, and slender,
And his eyes were deep and tender
As a woman's, in the splendor
  Of her maidenhood.

In the fore-hold Biorn and Bork
Watched the sailors at their work:
  Heavens! how they swore!
Thirty men they each commanded,
Iron-sinewed, horny-handed,
Shoulders broad, and chests expanded.
 Tugging at the oar.

These, and many more like these,
With King Olaf sailed the seas,
  Till the waters vast
Filled them with a vague devotion,
With the freedom and the motion,
With the roll and roar of ocean
  And the sounding blast.

When they landed from the fleet,
How they roared through Drontheim's street,
  Boisterous as the gale!
How they laughed and stamped and pounded,
Till the tavern roof resounded,
And the host looked on astounded
  As they drank the ale!

Never saw the wild North Sea
Such a gallant company
  Sail its billows blue!
Never, while they cruised and quarrelled,
Old King Gorm, or Blue-Tooth Harald,
Owned a ship so well apparelled,
  Boasted such a crew!



XV

A LITTLE BIRD IN THE AIR

A little bird in the air
Is singing of Thyri the fair,
  The sister of Svend the Dane;
And the song of the garrulous bird
In the streets of the town is heard,
  And repeated again and again.
    Hoist up your sails of silk,
    And flee away from each other.

To King Burislaf, it is said,
Was the beautiful Thyri wed,
  And a sorrowful bride went she;
And after a week and a day,
She has fled away and away,
  From his town by the stormy sea.
    Hoist up your sails of silk,
    And flee away from each other.

They say, that through heat and through cold,
Through weald, they say, and through wold,
  By day and by night, they say,
She has fled; and the gossips report
She has come to King Olaf's court,
  And the town is all in dismay.
    Hoist up your sails of silk,
    And flee away from each other.

It is whispered King Olaf has seen,
  Has talked with the beautiful Queen;
  And they wonder how it will end;
For surely, if here she remain,
It is war with King Svend the Dane,
  And King Burislaf the Vend!
    Hoist up your sails of silk,
    And flee away from each other.

O, greatest wonder of all!
It is published in hamlet and hall,
  It roars like a flame that is fanned!
The King--yes, Olaf the King--
Has wedded her with his ring,
  And Thyri is Queen in the land!
    Hoist up your sails of silk,
    And flee away from each other.



XVI

QUEEN THYRI AND THE ANGELICA STALKS

Northward over Drontheim,
Flew the clamorous sea-gulls,
Sang the lark and linnet
  From the meadows green;

Weeping in her chamber,
Lonely and unhappy,
Sat the Drottning Thyri,
  Sat King Olaf's Queen.

In at all the windows
Streamed the pleasant sunshine,
On the roof above her
  Softly cooed the dove;

But the sound she heard not,
Nor the sunshine heeded,
For the thoughts of Thyri
  Were not thoughts of love,

Then King Olaf entered,
Beautiful as morning,
Like the sun at Easter
  Shone his happy face;

In his hand he carried
Angelicas uprooted,
With delicious fragrance
  Filling all the place.

Like a rainy midnight
Sat the Drottning Thyri,
Even the smile of Olaf
  Could not cheer her gloom;

Nor the stalks he gave her
With a gracious gesture,
And with words as pleasant
  As their own perfume.

In her hands he placed them,
And her jewelled fingers
Through the green leaves glistened
  Like the dews of morn;

But she cast them from her,
Haughty and indignant,
On the floor she threw them
  With a look of scorn.

"Richer presents," said she,
"Gave King Harald Gormson
To the Queen, my mother,
  Than such worthless weeds;

"When he ravaged Norway,
Laying waste the kingdom,
Seizing scatt and treasure
  For her royal needs.

"But thou darest not venture
Through the Sound to Vendland,
My domains to rescue
  From King Burislaf;

"Lest King Svend of Denmark,
Forked Beard, my brother,
Scatter all thy vessels
  As the wind the chaff."

Then up sprang King Olaf,
Like a reindeer bounding,
With an oath he answered
  Thus the luckless Queen:

"Never yet did Olaf
Fear King Svend of Denmark;
This right hand shall hale him
  By his forked chin!"

Then he left the chamber,
Thundering through the doorway,
Loud his steps resounded
  Down the outer stair.

Smarting with the insult,
Through the streets of Drontheim
Strode he red and wrathful,
  With his stately air.

All his ships he gathered,
Summoned all his forces,
Making his war levy
  In the region round;

Down the coast of Norway,
Like a flock of sea-gulls,
Sailed the fleet of Olaf
  Through the Danish Sound.

With his own hand fearless,
Steered he the Long Serpent,
Strained the creaking cordage,
  Bent each boom and gaff;

Till in Venland landing,
The domains of Thyri
He redeemed and rescued
  From King Burislaf.

Then said Olaf, laughing,
"Not ten yoke of oxen
Have the power to draw us
  Like a woman's hair!

"Now will I confess it,
Better things are jewels
Than angelica stalks are
  For a Queen to wear."



XVII

KING SVEND OF THE FORKED BEAR

Loudly the sailors cheered
Svend of the Forked Beard,
As with his fleet he steered
  Southward to Vendland;
Where with their courses hauled
All were together called,
Under the Isle of Svald
  Near to the mainland.

After Queen Gunhild's death,
So the old Saga saith,
Plighted King Svend his faith
  To Sigrid the Haughty;
And to avenge his bride,
Soothing her wounded pride,
Over the waters wide
  King Olaf sought he.

Still on her scornful face,
Blushing with deep disgrace,
Bore she the crimson trace
  Of Olaf's gauntlet;
Like a malignant star,
Blazing in heaven afar,
Red shone the angry scar
  Under her frontlet.

Oft to King Svend she spake,
"For thine own honor's sake
Shalt thou swift vengeance take
  On the vile coward!"
Until the King at last,
Gusty and overcast,
Like a tempestuous blast
  Threatened and lowered.

Soon as the Spring appeared,
Svend of the Forked Beard
High his red standard reared,
  Eager for battle;
While every warlike Dane,
Seizing his arms again,
Left all unsown the grain,
  Unhoused the cattle.

Likewise the Swedish King
Summoned in haste a Thing,
Weapons and men to bring
  In aid of Denmark;
Erie the Norseman, too,
As the war-tidings flew,
Sailed with a chosen crew
  From Lapland and Finmark.

So upon Easter day
Sailed the three kings away,
Out of the sheltered bay,
  In the bright season;
With them Earl Sigvald came,
Eager for spoil and fame;
Pity that such a name
  Stooped to such treason!

Safe under Svald at last,
Now were their anchors cast,
Safe from the sea and blast,
  Plotted the three kings;
While, with a base intent,
Southward Earl Sigvald went,
On a foul errand bent,
  Unto the Sea-kings.

Thence to hold on his course,
Unto King Olaf's force,
Lying within the hoarse
  Mouths of Stet-haven;
Him to ensnare and bring,
Unto the Danish king,
Who his dead corse would fling
  Forth to the raven!



XVIII

KING OLAF AND EARL SIGVALD

On the gray sea-sands
King Olaf stands,
Northward and seaward
He points with his hands.

With eddy and whirl
The sea-tides curl,
Washing the sandals
Of Sigvald the Earl.

The mariners shout,
The ships swing about,
The yards are all hoisted,
The sails flutter out.

The war-horns are played,
The anchors are weighed,
Like moths in the distance
The sails flit and fade.

The sea is like lead
The harbor lies dead,
As a corse on the sea-shore,
Whose spirit has fled!

On that fatal day,
The histories say,
Seventy vessels
Sailed out of the bay.

But soon scattered wide
O'er the billows they ride,
While Sigvald and Olaf
Sail side by side.

Cried the Earl: "Follow me!
I your pilot will be,
For I know all the channels
Where flows the deep sea!"

So into the strait
Where his foes lie in wait,
Gallant King Olaf
Sails to his fate!

Then the sea-fog veils
The ships and their sails;
Queen Sigrid the Haughty,
Thy vengeance prevails!



XIX

KING OLAF'S WAR-HORNS

"Strike the sails!" King Olaf said;
"Never shall men of mine take flight;
Never away from battle I fled,
Never away from my foes!
    Let God dispose
Of my life in the fight!"

"Sound the horns!" said Olaf the King;
And suddenly through the drifting brume
The blare of the horns began to ring,
Like the terrible trumpet shock
    Of Regnarock,
On the Day of Doom!

Louder and louder the war-horns sang
Over the level floor of the flood;
All the sails came down with a clang,
And there in the mist overhead
    The sun hung red
As a drop of blood.

Drifting down on the Danish fleet
Three together the ships were lashed,
So that neither should turn and retreat;
In the midst, but in front of the rest
    The burnished crest
Of the Serpent flashed.

King Olaf stood on the quarter-deck,
With bow of ash and arrows of oak,
His gilded shield was without a fleck,
His helmet inlaid with gold,
    And in many a fold
Hung his crimson cloak.

On the forecastle Ulf the Red
Watched the lashing of the ships;
"If the Serpent lie so far ahead,
We shall have hard work of it here,
    Said he with a sneer
On his bearded lips.

King Olaf laid an arrow on string,
"Have I a coward on board?" said he.
"Shoot it another way, O King!"
Sullenly answered Ulf,
    The old sea-wolf;
"You have need of me!"

In front came Svend, the King of the Danes,
Sweeping down with his fifty rowers;
To the right, the Swedish king with his thanes;
And on board of the Iron Beard
    Earl Eric steered
To the left with his oars.

"These soft Danes and Swedes," said the King,
"At home with their wives had better stay,
Than come within reach of my Serpent's sting:
But where Eric the Norseman leads
    Heroic deeds
Will be done to-day!"

Then as together the vessels crashed,
Eric severed the cables of hide,
With which King Olaf's ships were lashed,
And left them to drive and drift
    With the currents swift
Of the outward tide.

Louder the war-horns growl and snarl,
Sharper the dragons bite and sting!
Eric the son of Hakon Jarl
A death-drink salt as the sea
    Pledges to thee,
Olaf the King!



XX

EINAR TAMBERSKELVER

It was Einar Tamberskelver
  Stood beside the mast;
From his yew-bow, tipped with silver,
  Flew the arrows fast;
Aimed at Eric unavailing,
  As he sat concealed,
Half behind the quarter-railing,
  Half behind his shield.

First an arrow struck the tiller,
  Just above his head;
"Sing, O Eyvind Skaldaspiller,"
  Then Earl Eric said.
"Sing the song of Hakon dying,
  Sing his funeral wail!"
And another arrow flying
  Grazed his coat of mail.

Turning to a Lapland yeoman,
  As the arrow passed,
Said Earl Eric, "Shoot that bowman
  Standing by the mast."
Sooner than the word was spoken
  Flew the yeoman's shaft;
Einar's bow in twain was broken,
  Einar only laughed.

"What was that?" said Olaf, standing
  On the quarter-deck.
"Something heard I like the stranding
  Of a shattered wreck."
Einar then, the arrow taking
  From the loosened string,
Answered, "That was Norway breaking
  From thy hand, O King!"

"Thou art but a poor diviner,"
  Straightway Olaf said;
"Take my bow, and swifter, Einar,
  Let thy shafts be sped."
Of his bows the fairest choosing,
  Reached he from above;
Einar saw the blood-drops oozing
  Through his iron glove.

But the bow was thin and narrow;
  At the first assay,
O'er its head he drew the arrow,
  Flung the bow away;
Said, with hot and angry temper
  Flushing in his cheek,
"Olaf! for so great a Kamper
  Are thy bows too weak!"

Then, with smile of joy defiant
  On his beardless lip,
Scaled he, light and self-reliant,
  Eric's dragon-ship.
Loose his golden locks were flowing,
  Bright his armor gleamed;
Like Saint Michael overthrowing
  Lucifer he seemed.



XXI

KING OLAF'S DEATH-DRINK

All day has the battle raged,
All day have the ships engaged,
But not yet is assuaged
  The vengeance of Eric the Earl.

The decks with blood are red,
The arrows of death are sped,
The ships are filled with the dead,
  And the spears the champions hurl.

They drift as wrecks on the tide,
The grappling-irons are plied,
The boarders climb up the side,
  The shouts are feeble and few.

Ah! never shall Norway again
See her sailors come back o'er the main;
They all lie wounded or slain,
  Or asleep in the billows blue!

On the deck stands Olaf the King,
Around him whistle and sing
The spears that the foemen fling,
  And the stones they hurl with their hands.

In the midst of the stones and the spears,
Kolbiorn, the marshal, appears,
His shield in the air he uprears,
  By the side of King Olaf he stands.

Over the slippery wreck
Of the Long Serpent's deck
Sweeps Eric with hardly a check,
  His lips with anger are pale;

He hews with his axe at the mast,
Till it falls, with the sails overcast,
Like a snow-covered pine in the vast
  Dim forests of Orkadale.

Seeking King Olaf then,
He rushes aft with his men,
As a hunter into the den
  Of the bear, when he stands at bay.

"Remember Jarl Hakon!" he cries;
When lo! on his wondering eyes,
Two kingly figures arise,
  Two Olaf's in warlike array!

Then Kolbiorn speaks in the ear
Of King Olaf a word of cheer,
In a whisper that none may hear,
  With a smile on his tremulous lip;

Two shields raised high in the air,
Two flashes of golden hair,
Two scarlet meteors' glare,
  And both have leaped from the ship.

Earl Eric's men in the boats
Seize Kolbiorn's shield as it floats,
And cry, from their hairy throats,
  "See! it is Olaf the King!"

While far on the opposite side
Floats another shield on the tide,
Like a jewel set in the wide
  Sea-current's eddying ring.

There is told a wonderful tale,
How the King stripped off his mail,
Like leaves of the brown sea-kale,
  As he swam beneath the main;

But the young grew old and gray,
And never, by night or by day,
In his kingdom of Norroway
  Was King Olaf seen again!



XXII

THE NUN OF NIDAROS

In the convent of Drontheim,
Alone in her chamber
Knelt Astrid the Abbess,
At midnight, adoring,
Beseeching, entreating
The Virgin and Mother.

She heard in the silence
The voice of one speaking,
Without in the darkness,
In gusts of the night-wind
Now louder, now nearer,
Now lost in the distance.

The voice of a stranger
It seemed as she listened,
Of some one who answered,
Beseeching, imploring,
A cry from afar off
She could not distinguish.

The voice of Saint John,
The beloved disciple,
Who wandered and waited
The Master's appearance.
Alone in the darkness,
Unsheltered and friendless.

"It is accepted
The angry defiance
The challenge of battle!
It is accepted,
But not with the weapons
Of war that thou wieldest!

"Cross against corselet,
Love against hatred,
Peace-cry for war-cry!
Patience is powerful;
He that o'ercometh
Hath power o'er the nations!

"As torrents in summer,
Half dried in their channels,
Suddenly rise, though the
Sky is still cloudless,
For rain has been falling
Far off at their fountains;

So hearts that are fainting
Grow full to o'erflowing,
And they that behold it
Marvel, and know not
That God at their fountains
Far off has been raining!

"Stronger than steel
Is the sword of the Spirit;
Swifter than arrows
The light of the truth is,
Greater than anger
Is love, and subdueth!

"Thou art a phantom,
A shape of the sea-mist,
A shape of the brumal
Rain, and the darkness
Fearful and formless;
Day dawns and thou art not!

"The dawn is not distant,
Nor is the night starless;
Love is eternal!
God is still God, and
His faith shall not fail us
Christ is eternal!"




INTERLUDE

A strain of music closed the tale,
A low, monotonous, funeral wail,
That with its cadence, wild and sweet,
Made the long Saga more complete.

"Thank God," the Theologian said,
"The reign of violence is dead,
Or dying surely from the world;
While Love triumphant reigns instead,
And in a brighter sky o'erhead
His blessed banners are unfurled.
And most of all thank God for this:
The war and waste of clashing creeds
Now end in words, and not in deeds,
And no one suffers loss, or bleeds,
For thoughts that men call heresies.

"I stand without here in the porch,
I hear the bell's melodious din,
I hear the organ peal within,
I hear the prayer, with words that scorch
Like sparks from an inverted torch,
I hear the sermon upon sin,
With threatenings of the last account.
And all, translated in the air,
Reach me but as our dear Lord's Prayer,
And as the Sermon on the Mount.

"Must it be Calvin, and not Christ?
Must it be Athanasian creeds,
Or holy water, books, and beads?
Must struggling souls remain content
With councils and decrees of Trend?
And can it be enough for these
The Christian Church the year embalms
With evergreens and boughs of palms,
And fills the air with litanies?

"I know that yonder Pharisee
Thanks God that he is not like me;
In my humiliation dressed,
I only stand and beat my breast,
And pray for human charity.

"Not to one church alone, but seven,
The voice prophetic spake from heaven;
And unto each the promise came,
Diversified, but still the same;
For him that overcometh are
The new name written on the stone,
The raiment white, the crown, the throne,
And I will give him the Morning Star!

"Ah! to how many Faith has been
No evidence of things unseen,
But a dim shadow, that recasts
The creed of the Phantasiasts,
For whom no Man of Sorrows died,
For whom the Tragedy Divine
Was but a symbol and a sign,
And Christ a phantom crucified!

"For others a diviner creed
Is living in the life they lead.
The passing of their beautiful feet
Blesses the pavement of the street
And all their looks and words repeat
Old Fuller's saying, wise and sweet,
Not as a vulture, but a dove,
The Holy Ghost came from above.

"And this brings back to me a tale
So sad the hearer well may quail,
And question if such things can be;
Yet in the chronicles of Spain
Down the dark pages runs this stain,
And naught can wash them white again,
So fearful is the tragedy."



THE THEOLOGIAN'S TALE

TORQUEMADA

In the heroic days when Ferdinand
And Isabella ruled the Spanish land,
And Torquemada, with his subtle brain,
Ruled them, as Grand Inquisitor of Spain,
In a great castle near Valladolid,
Moated and high and by fair woodlands hid,
There dwelt as from the chronicles we learn,
An old Hidalgo proud and taciturn,
Whose name has perished, with his towers of stone,
And all his actions save this one alone;
This one, so terrible, perhaps 't were best
If it, too, were forgotten with the rest;
Unless, perchance, our eyes can see therein
The martyrdom triumphant o'er the sin;
A double picture, with its gloom and glow,
The splendor overhead, the death below.

This sombre man counted each day as lost
On which his feet no sacred threshold crossed;
And when he chanced the passing Host to meet,
He knelt and prayed devoutly in the street;
Oft he confessed; and with each mutinous thought,
As with wild beasts at Ephesus, he fought.
In deep contrition scourged himself in Lent,
Walked in processions, with his head down bent,
At plays of Corpus Christi oft was seen,
And on Palm Sunday bore his bough of green.
His sole diversion was to hunt the boar
Through tangled thickets of the forest hoar,
Or with his jingling mules to hurry down
To some grand bull-fight in the neighboring town,
Or in the crowd with lighted taper stand,
When Jews were burned, or banished from the land.
Then stirred within him a tumultuous joy;
The demon whose delight is to destroy
Shook him, and shouted with a trumpet tone,
Kill! kill! and let the Lord find out his own!"

And now, in that old castle in the wood,
His daughters, in the dawn of womanhood,
Returning from their convent school, had made
Resplendent with their bloom the forest shade,
Reminding him of their dead mother's face,
When first she came into that gloomy place,--
A memory in his heart as dim and sweet
As moonlight in a solitary street,
Where the same rays, that lift the sea, are thrown
Lovely but powerless upon walls of stone.
These two fair daughters of a mother dead
Were all the dream had left him as it fled.
A joy at first, and then a growing care,
As if a voice within him cried, "Beware
A vague presentiment of impending doom,
Like ghostly footsteps in a vacant room,
Haunted him day and night; a formless fear
That death to some one of his house was near,
With dark surmises of a hidden crime,
Made life itself a death before its time.
Jealous, suspicious, with no sense of shame,
A spy upon his daughters he became;
With velvet slippers, noiseless on the floors,
He glided softly through half-open doors;
Now in the room, and now upon the stair,
He stood beside them ere they were aware;
He listened in the passage when they talked,
He watched them from the casement when they walked,
He saw the gypsy haunt the river's side,
He saw the monk among the cork-trees glide;
And, tortured by the mystery and the doubt
Of some dark secret, past his finding out,
Baffled he paused; then reassured again
Pursued the flying phantom of his brain.
He watched them even when they knelt in church;
And then, descending lower in his search,
Questioned the servants, and with eager eyes
Listened incredulous to their replies;
The gypsy? none had seen her in the wood!
The monk? a mendicant in search of food!

At length the awful revelation came,
Crushing at once his pride of birth and name;
The hopes his yearning bosom forward cast,
And the ancestral glories of the vast,
All fell together, crumbling in disgrace,
A turret rent from battlement to base.
His daughters talking in the dead of night
In their own chamber, and without a light,
Listening, as he was wont, he overheard,
And learned the dreadful secret, word by word;
And hurrying from his castle, with a cry
He raised his hands to the unpitying sky,
Repeating one dread word, till bush and tree
Caught it, and shuddering answered, "Heresy!"

Wrapped in his cloak, his hat drawn o'er his face,
Now hurrying forward, now with lingering pace,
He walked all night the alleys of his park,
With one unseen companion in the dark,
The Demon who within him lay in wait,
And by his presence turned his love to hate,
Forever muttering in an undertone,
"Kill! kill! and let the Lord find out his own!"

Upon the morrow, after early Mass,
While yet the dew was glistening on the grass,
And all the woods were musical with birds,
The old Hidalgo, uttering fearful words,
Walked homeward with the Priest, and in his room
Summoned his trembling daughters to their doom.
When questioned, with brief answers they replied,
Nor when accused evaded or denied;
Expostulations, passionate appeals,
All that the human heart most fears or feels,
In vain the Priest with earnest voice essayed;
In vain the father threatened, wept, and prayed;
Until at last he said, with haughty mien,
"The Holy Office, then, must intervene!"

And now the Grand Inquisitor of Spain,
With all the fifty horsemen of his train,
His awful name resounding, like the blast
Of funeral trumpets, as he onward passed,
Came to Valladolid, and there began
To harry the rich Jews with fire and ban.
To him the Hidalgo went, and at the gate
Demanded audience on affairs of state,
And in a secret chamber stood before
A venerable graybeard of fourscore,
Dressed in the hood and habit of a friar;
Out of his eyes flashed a consuming fire,
And in his hand the mystic horn he held,
Which poison and all noxious charms dispelled.
He heard in silence the Hidalgo's tale,
Then answered in a voice that made him quail:
"Son of the Church! when Abraham of old
To sacrifice his only son was told,
He did not pause to parley nor protest
But hastened to obey the Lord's behest.
In him it was accounted righteousness;
The Holy Church expects of thee no less!"

A sacred frenzy seized the father's brain,
And Mercy from that hour implored in vain.
Ah! who will e'er believe the words I say?
His daughters he accused, and the same day
They both were cast into the dungeon's gloom,
That dismal antechamber of the tomb,
Arraigned, condemned, and sentenced to the flame,
The secret torture and the public shame.

Then to the Grand Inquisitor once more
The Hidalgo went, more eager than before,
And said: "When Abraham offered up his son,
He clave the wood wherewith it might be done.
By his example taught, let me too bring
Wood from the forest for my offering!"
And the deep voice, without a pause, replied:
"Son of the Church! by faith now justified,
Complete thy sacrifice, even as thou wilt;
The Church absolves thy conscience from all guilt!"

Then this most wretched father went his way
Into the woods, that round his castle lay,
Where once his daughters in their childhood played
With their young mother in the sun and shade.
Now all the leaves had fallen; the branches bare
Made a perpetual moaning in the air,
And screaming from their eyries overhead
The ravens sailed athwart the sky of lead.
With his own hands he lopped the boughs and bound
Fagots, that crackled with foreboding sound,
And on his mules, caparisoned and gay
With bells and tassels, sent them on their way.

Then with his mind on one dark purpose bent,
Again to the Inquisitor he went,
And said: "Behold, the fagots I have brought,
And now, lest my atonement be as naught,
Grant me one more request, one last desire,--
With my own hand to light the funeral fire!"
And Torquemada answered from his seat,
"Son of the Church!  Thine offering is complete;
Her servants through all ages shall not cease
To magnify thy deed.  Depart in peace!"

Upon the market-place, builded of stone
The scaffold rose, whereon Death claimed his own.
At the four corners, in stern attitude,
Four statues of the Hebrew Prophets stood,
Gazing with calm indifference in their eyes
Upon this place of human sacrifice,
Round which was gathering fast the eager crowd,
With clamor of voices dissonant and loud,
And every roof and window was alive
With restless gazers, swarming like a hive.

The church-bells tolled, the chant of monks drew near,
Loud trumpets stammered forth their notes of fear,
A line of torches smoked along the street,
There was a stir, a rush, a tramp of feet,
And, with its banners floating in the air,
Slowly the long procession crossed the square,
And, to the statues of the Prophets bound,
The victims stood, with fagots piled around.
Then all the air a blast of trumpets shook,
And louder sang the monks with bell and book,
And the Hidalgo, lofty, stern, and proud,
Lifted his torch, and, bursting through the crowd,
Lighted in haste the fagots, and then fled,
Lest those imploring eyes should strike him dead!

O pitiless skies! why did your clouds retain
For peasants' fields their floods of hoarded rain?
O pitiless earth! why open no abyss
To bury in its chasm a crime like this?

That night a mingled column of fire and smoke
Prom the dark thickets of the forest broke,
And, glaring o'er the landscape leagues away,
Made all the fields and hamlets bright as day.
Wrapped in a sheet of flame the castle blazed,
And as the villagers in terror gazed,
They saw the figure of that cruel knight
Lean from a window in the turret's height,
His ghastly face illumined with the glare,
His hands upraised above his head in prayer,
Till the floor sank beneath him, and he fell
Down the black hollow of that burning well.

Three centuries and more above his bones
Have piled the oblivious years like funeral stones;
His name has perished with him, and no trace
Remains on earth of his afflicted race;
But Torquemada's name, with clouds o'ercast,
Looms in the distant landscape of the Past,
Like a burnt tower upon a blackened heath,
Lit by the fires of burning woods beneath!



INTERLUDE

Thus closed the tale of guilt and gloom,
That cast upon each listener's face
Its shadow, and for some brief space
Unbroken silence filled the room.
The Jew was thoughtful and distressed;
Upon his memory thronged and pressed
The persecution of his race,
Their wrongs and sufferings and disgrace;
His head was sunk upon his breast,
And from his eyes alternate came
Flashes of wrath and tears of shame.

The student first the silence broke,
As one who long has lain in wait
With purpose to retaliate,
And thus he dealt the avenging stroke.
"In such a company as this,
A tale so tragic seems amiss,
That by its terrible control
O'ermasters and drags down the soul
Into a fathomless abyss.
The Italian Tales that you disdain,
Some merry Night of Straparole,
Or Machiavelli's Belphagor,
Would cheer us and delight us more,
Give greater pleasure and less pain
Than your grim tragedies of Spain!"

And here the Poet raised his hand,
With such entreaty and command,
It stopped discussion at its birth,
And said: "The story I shall tell
Has meaning in it, if not mirth;
Listen, and hear what once befell
The merry birds of Killingworth!"



THE POET'S TALE

THE BIRDS OF KILLINGWORTH

It was the season, when through all the land
  The merle and mavis build, and building sing
Those lovely lyrics, written by His hand,
  Whom Saxon Caedmon calls the Blitheheart King;
When on the boughs the purple buds expand,
  The banners of the vanguard of the Spring,
And rivulets, rejoicing, rush and leap,
And wave their fluttering signals from the steep.

The robin and the bluebird, piping loud,
  Filled all the blossoming orchards with their glee;
The sparrows chirped as if they still were proud
  Their race in Holy Writ should mentioned be;
And hungry crows assembled in a crowd,
  Clamored their piteous prayer incessantly,
Knowing who hears the ravens cry, and said:
"Give us, O Lord, this day our daily bread!"

Across the Sound the birds of passage sailed,
  Speaking some unknown language strange and sweet
Of tropic isle remote, and passing hailed
  The village with the cheers of all their fleet;
Or quarrelling together, laughed and railed
  Like foreign sailors, landed in the street
Of seaport town, and with outlandish noise
Of oaths and gibberish frightening girls and boys.

Thus came the jocund Spring in Killingworth,
  In fabulous day; some hundred years ago;
And thrifty farmers, as they tilled the earth,
  Heard with alarm the cawing of the crow,
That mingled with the universal mirth,
  Cassandra-like, prognosticating woe;
They shook their heads, and doomed with dreadful words
To swift destruction the whole race of birds.

And a town-meeting was convened straightway
  To set a price upon the guilty heads
Of these marauders, who, in lieu of pay,
  Levied black-mail upon the garden beds
And cornfields, and beheld without dismay
  The awful scarecrow, with his fluttering shreds;
The skeleton that waited at their feast,
Whereby their sinful pleasure was increased.

Then from his house, a temple painted white,
  With fluted columns, and a roof of red,
The Squire came forth, august and splendid sight!
  Slowly descending, with majestic tread,
Three flights of steps, nor looking left nor right,
  Down the long street he walked, as one who said,
"A town that boasts inhabitants like me
Can have no lack of good society!"

The Parson, too, appeared, a man austere,
  The instinct of whose nature was to kill;
The wrath of God he preached from year to year,
  And read, with fervor, Edwards on the Will;
His favorite pastime was to slay the deer
  In Summer on some Adirondac hill;
E'en now, while walking down the rural lane,
He lopped the wayside lilies with his cane.

From the Academy, whose belfry crowned
  The hill of Science with its vane of brass,
Came the Preceptor, gazing idly round,
  Now at the clouds, and now at the green grass,
And all absorbed in reveries profound
  Of fair Almira in the upper class,
Who was, as in a sonnet he had said,
As pure as water, and as good as bread.

And next the Deacon issued from his door,
  In his voluminous neck-cloth, white as snow;
A suit of sable bombazine he wore;
  His form was ponderous, and his step was slow;
There never was so wise a man before;
  He seemed the incarnate "Well, I told you so!"
And to perpetuate his great renown
There was a street named after him in town.

These came together in the new town-hall,
  With sundry farmers from the region round.
The Squirt presided, dignified and tall,
  His air impressive and his reasoning sound;
Ill fared it with the birds, both great and small;
  Hardly a friend in all that crowd they found,
But enemies enough, who every one
Charged them with all the crimes beneath the sun.

When they had ended, from his place apart,
  Rose the Preceptor, to redress the wrong,
And, trembling like a steed before the start,
  Looked round bewildered on the expectant throng;
Then thought of fair Almira, and took heart
  To speak out what was in him, clear and strong,
Alike regardless of their smile or frown,
And quite determined not to be laughed down.

"Plato, anticipating the Reviewers,
  From his Republic banished without pity
The Poets; in this little town of yours,
  You put to death, by means of a Committee,
The ballad-singers and the Troubadours,
  The street-musicians of the heavenly city,
The birds, who make sweet music for us all
In our dark hours, as David did for Saul.

"The thrush that carols at the dawn of day
  From the green steeples of the piny wood;
The oriole in the elm; the noisy jay,
  Jargoning like a foreigner at his food;
The bluebird balanced on some topmost spray,
  Flooding with melody the neighborhood;
Linnet and meadow-lark, and all the throng
That dwell in nests, and have the gift of song.

"You slay them all! and wherefore! for the gain
  Of a scant handful more or less of wheat,
Or rye, or barley, or some other grain,
  Scratched up at random by industrious feet,
Searching for worm or weevil after rain!
  Or a few cherries, that are not so sweet
As are the songs these uninvited guests,
Sing at their feast with comfortable breasts.

"Do you ne'er think what wondrous beings these?
  Do you ne'er think who made them and who taught
The dialect they speak, where melodies
  Alone are the interpreters of thought?
Whose household words are songs in many keys,
  Sweeter than instrument of man e'er caught!
Whose habitations in the tree-tops even
Are half-way houses on the road to heaven!

"Think, every morning when the sun peeps through
  The dim, leaf-latticed windows of the grove,
How jubilant the happy birds renew
 Their old, melodious madrigals of love!
And when you think of this, remember too
  'T is always morning somewhere, and above
The awakening continent; from shore to shore,
Somewhere the birds are singing evermore.

"Think of your woods and orchards without birds!
  Of empty nests that cling to boughs and beams
As in an idiot's brain remembered words
  Hang empty 'mid the cobwebs of his dreams!
Will bleat of flocks or bellowing of herds
  Make up for the lost music, when your teams
Drag home the stingy harvest, and no more
The feathered gleaners follow to your door?

"What! would you rather see the incessant stir
  Of insects in the windrows of the hay,
And hear the locust and the grasshopper
  Their melancholy hurdy-gurdies play?
Is this more pleasant to you than the whir
  Of meadow-lark, and her sweet roundelay,
Or twitter of little field-fares, as you take
Your nooning in the shade of bush and brake?

"You call them thieves and pillagers; but know,
  They are the winged wardens of your farms,
Who from the cornfields drive the insidious foe,
  And from your harvests keep a hundred harms;
Even the blackest of them all, the crow,
  Renders good service as your man-at-arms,
Crushing the beetle in his coat of mail,
And crying havoc on the slug and snail.

"How can I teach your children gentleness,
  And mercy to the weak, and reverence
For Life, which, in its weakness or excess,
  Is still a gleam of God's omnipotence,
Or Death, which, seeming darkness, is no less
  The selfsame light, although averted hence,
When by your laws, your actions, and your speech,
You contradict the very things I teach?"

With this he closed; and through the audience went
  A murmur, like the rustle of dead leaves;
The farmers laughed and nodded, and some bent
  Their yellow heads together like their sheaves;
Men have no faith in fine-spun sentiment
  Who put their trust in bullocks and in beeves.
The birds were doomed; and, as the record shows,
A bounty offered for the heads of crows.

There was another audience out of reach,
  Who had no voice nor vote in making laws,
But in the papers read his little speech,
  And crowned his modest temples with applause;
They made him conscious, each one more than each,
  He still was victor, vanquished in their cause.
Sweetest of all the applause he won from thee,
O fair Almira at the Academy!

And so the dreadful massacre began;
  O'er fields and orchards, and o'er woodland crests,
The ceaseless fusillade of terror ran.
  Dead fell the birds, with blood-stains on their breasts,
Or wounded crept away from sight of man,
  While the young died of famine in their nests;
A slaughter to be told in groans, not words,
The very St. Bartholomew of Birds!

The Summer came, and all the birds were dead;
  The days were like hot coals; the very ground
Was burned to ashes; in the orchards fed
  Myriads of caterpillars, and around
The cultivated fields and garden beds
  Hosts of devouring insects crawled, and found
No foe to check their march, till they had made
The land a desert without leaf or shade.

Devoured by worms, like Herod, was the town,
  Because, like Herod, it had ruthlessly
Slaughtered the Innocents.  From the trees spun down
  The canker-worms upon the passers-by,
Upon each woman's bonnet, shawl, and gown,
  Who shook them off with just a little cry
They were the terror of each favorite walk,
The endless theme of all the village talk.

The farmers grew impatient but a few
  Confessed their error, and would not complain,
For after all, the best thing one can do
  When it is raining, is to let it rain.
Then they repealed the law, although they knew
  It would not call the dead to life again;
As school-boys, finding their mistake too late,
Draw a wet sponge across the accusing slate.

That year in Killingworth the Autumn came
  Without the light of his majestic look,
The wonder of the falling tongues of flame,
  The illumined pages of his Doom's-Day book.
A few lost leaves blushed crimson with their shame,
  And drowned themselves despairing in the brook,
While the wild wind went moaning everywhere,
Lamenting the dead children of the air!

But the next Spring a stranger sight was seen,
  A sight that never yet by bard was sung,
As great a wonder as it would have been
  If some dumb animal had found a tongue!
A wagon, overarched with evergreen,
  Upon whose boughs were wicker cages hung,
All full of singing birds, came down the street,
Filling the air with music wild and sweet.

From all the country round these birds were brought,
  By order of the town, with anxious quest,
And, loosened from their wicker prisons, sought
  In woods and fields the places they loved best,
Singing loud canticles, which many thought
  Were satires to the authorities addressed,
While others, listening in green lanes, averred
Such lovely music never had been heard!

But blither still and louder carolled they
  Upon the morrow, for they seemed to know
It was the fair Almira's wedding-day,
  And everywhere, around, above, below,
When the Preceptor bore his bride away,
  Their songs burst forth in joyous overflow,
And a new heaven bent over a new earth
Amid the sunny farms of Killingworth.



FINALE

The hour was late; the fire burned low,
The Landlord's eyes were closed in sleep,
And near the story's end a deep
Sonorous sound at times was heard,
As when the distant bagpipes blow.
At this all laughed; the Landlord stirred,
As one awaking from a swound,
And, gazing anxiously around,
Protested that he had not slept,
But only shut his eyes, and kept
His ears attentive to each word.

Then all arose, and said "Good Night."
Alone remained the drowsy Squire
To rake the embers of the fire,
And quench the waning parlor light.
While from the windows, here and there,
The scattered lamps a moment gleamed,
And the illumined hostel seemed
The constellation of the Bear,
Downward, athwart the misty air,
Sinking and setting toward the sun,
Far off the village clock struck one.



PART SECOND

PRELUDE

A cold, uninterrupted rain,
That washed each southern window-pane,
And made a river of the road;
A sea of mist that overflowed
The house, the barns, the gilded vane,
And drowned the upland and the plain,
Through which the oak-trees, broad and high,
Like phantom ships went drifting by;
And, hidden behind a watery screen,
The sun unseen, or only seen
As a faint pallor in the sky;--
Thus cold and colorless and gray,
The morn of that autumnal day,
As if reluctant to begin,
Dawned on the silent Sudbury Inn,
And all the guests that in it lay.

Full late they slept.  They did not hear
The challenge of Sir Chanticleer,
Who on the empty threshing-floor,
Disdainful of the rain outside,
Was strutting with a martial stride,
As if upon his thigh he wore
The famous broadsword of the Squire,
And said, "Behold me, and admire!"

Only the Poet seemed to hear,
In drowse or dream, more near and near
Across the border-land of sleep
The blowing of a blithesome horn,
That laughed the dismal day to scorn;
A splash of hoofs and rush of wheels
Through sand and mire like stranding keels,
As from the road with sudden sweep
The Mail drove up the little steep,
And stopped beside the tavern door;
A moment stopped, and then again
With crack of whip and bark of dog
Plunged forward through the sea of fog,
And all was silent as before,--
All silent save the dripping rain.

Then one by one the guests came down,
And greeted with a smile the Squire,
Who sat before the parlor fire,
Reading the paper fresh from town.
First the Sicilian, like a bird,
Before his form appeared, was heard
Whistling and singing down the stair;
Then came the Student, with a look
As placid as a meadow-brook;
The Theologian, still perplexed
With thoughts of this world and the next;
The Poet then, as one who seems
Walking in visions and in dreams;
Then the Musician, like a fair
Hyperion from whose golden hair
The radiance of the morning streams;
And last the aromatic Jew
Of Alicant, who, as he threw
The door wide open, on the air
Breathed round about him a perfume
Of damask roses in full bloom,
Making a garden of the room.

The breakfast ended, each pursued
The promptings of his various mood;
Beside the fire in silence smoked
The taciturn, impassive Jew,
Lost in a pleasant revery;
While, by his gravity provoked,
His portrait the Sicilian drew,
And wrote beneath it "Edrehi,
At the Red Horse in Sudbury."

By far the busiest of them all,
The Theologian in the hall
Was feeding robins in a cage,--
Two corpulent and lazy birds,
Vagrants and pilferers at best,
If one might trust the hostler's words,
Chief instrument of their arrest;
Two poets of the Golden Age,
Heirs of a boundless heritage
Of fields and orchards, east and west,
And sunshine of long summer days,
Though outlawed now and dispossessed!--
Such was the Theologian's phrase.

Meanwhile the Student held discourse
With the Musician, on the source
Of all the legendary lore
Among the nations, scattered wide
Like silt and seaweed by the force
And fluctuation of the tide;
The tale repeated o'er and o'er,
With change of place and change of name,
Disguised, transformed, and yet the same
We've heard a hundred times before.

The Poet at the window mused,
And saw, as in a dream confused,
The countenance of the Sun, discrowned,
And haggard with a pale despair,
And saw the cloud-rack trail and drift
Before it, and the trees uplift
Their leafless branches, and the air
Filled with the arrows of the rain,
And heard amid the mist below,
Like voices of distress and pain,
That haunt the thoughts of men insane,
The fateful cawings of the crow.

Then down the road, with mud besprent,
And drenched with rain from head to hoof,
The rain-drops dripping from his mane
And tail as from a pent-house roof,
A jaded horse, his head down bent,
Passed slowly, limping as he went.

The young Sicilian--who had grown
Impatient longer to abide
A prisoner, greatly mortified
To see completely overthrown
His plans for angling in the brook,
And, leaning o'er the bridge of stone,
To watch the speckled trout glide by,
And float through the inverted sky,
Still round and round the baited hook--
Now paced the room with rapid stride,
And, pausing at the Poet's side,
Looked forth, and saw the wretched steed,
And said: "Alas for human greed,
That with cold hand and stony eye
Thus turns an old friend out to die,
Or beg his food from gate to gate!
This brings a tale into my mind,
Which, if you are not disinclined
To listen, I will now relate."

All gave assent; all wished to hear,
Not without many a jest and jeer,
The story of a spavined steed;
And even the Student with the rest
Put in his pleasant little jest
Out of Malherbe, that Pegasus
Is but a horse that with all speed
Bears poets to the hospital;
While the Sicilian, self-possessed,
After a moment's interval
Began his simple story thus.



THE SICILIAN'S TALE

THE BELL OF ATRI

At Atri in Abruzzo, a small town
Of ancient Roman date, but scant renown,
One of those little places that have run
Half up the hill, beneath a blazing sun,
And then sat down to rest, as if to say,
"I climb no farther upward, come what may,"--
The Re Giovanni, now unknown to fame,
So many monarchs since have borne the name,
Had a great bell hung in the market-place
Beneath a roof, projecting some small space,
By way of shelter from the sun and rain.
Then rode he through the streets with all his train,
And, with the blast of trumpets loud and long,
Made proclamation, that whenever wrong
Was done to any man, he should but ring
The great bell in the square, and he, the King,
Would cause the Syndic to decide thereon.
Such was the proclamation of King John.

How swift the happy days in Atri sped,
What wrongs were righted, need not here be said.
Suffice it that, as all things must decay,
The hempen rope at length was worn away,
Unravelled at the end, and, strand by strand,
Loosened and wasted in the ringer's hand,
Till one, who noted this in passing by,
Mended the rope with braids of briony,
So that the leaves and tendrils of the vine
Hung like a votive garland at a shrine.

By chance it happened that in Atri dwelt
A knight, with spur on heel and sword in belt,
Who loved to hunt the wild-boar in the woods,
Who loved his falcons with their crimson hoods,
Who loved his hounds and horses, and all sports
And prodigalities of camps and courts;--
Loved, or had loved them; for at last, grown old,
His only passion was the love of gold.

He sold his horses, sold his hawks and hounds,
Rented his vineyards and his garden-grounds,
Kept but one steed, his favorite steed of all,
To starve and shiver in a naked stall,
And day by day sat brooding in his chair,
Devising plans how best to hoard and spare.

At length he said: "What is the use or need
To keep at my own cost this lazy steed,
Eating his head off in my stables here,
When rents are low and provender is dear?
Let him go feed upon the public ways;
I want him only for the holidays."
So the old steed was turned into the heat
Of the long, lonely, silent, shadeless street;
And wandered in suburban lanes forlorn,
Barked at by dogs, and torn by brier and thorn.

One afternoon, as in that sultry clime
It is the custom in the summer time,
With bolted doors and window-shutters closed,
The inhabitants of Atri slept or dozed;
When suddenly upon their senses fell
The loud alarum of the accusing bell!
The Syndic started from his deep repose,
Turned on his couch, and listened, and then rose
And donned his robes, and with reluctant pace
Went panting forth into the market-place,
Where the great bell upon its cross-beam swung
Reiterating with persistent tongue,
In half-articulate jargon, the old song:
"Some one hath done a wrong, hath done a wrong!"

But ere he reached the belfry's light arcade
He saw, or thought he saw, beneath its shade,
No shape of human form of woman born,
But a poor steed dejected and forlorn,
Who with uplifted head and eager eye
Was tugging at the vines of briony.
"Domeneddio!" cried the Syndie straight,
"This is the Knight of Atri's steed of state!
He calls for justice, being sore distressed,
And pleads his cause as loudly as the best."

Meanwhile from street and lane a noisy crowd
Had rolled together like a summer cloud,
And told the story of the wretched beast
In five-and-twenty different ways at least,
With much gesticulation and appeal
To heathen gods, in their excessive zeal.
The Knight was called and questioned; in reply
Did not confess the fact, did not deny;
Treated the matter as a pleasant jest,
And set at naught the Syndic and the rest,
Maintaining, in an angry undertone,
That he should do what pleased him with his own.

And thereupon the Syndic gravely read
The proclamation of the King; then said:
"Pride goeth forth on horseback grand and gay,
But cometh back on foot, and begs its way;
Fame is the fragrance of heroic deeds,
Of flowers of chivalry and not of weeds!
These are familiar proverbs; but I fear
They never yet have reached your knightly ear.
What fair renown, what honor, what repute
Can come to you from starving this poor brute?
He who serves well and speaks not, merits more
Than they who clamor loudest at the door.
Therefore the law decrees that as this steed
Served you in youth, henceforth you shall take heed
To comfort his old age, and to provide
Shelter in stall an food and field beside."

The Knight withdrew abashed; the people all
Led home the steed in triumph to his stall.
The King heard and approved, and laughed in glee
And cried aloud: "Right well it pleaseth me!
Church-bells at best but ring us to the door;
But go not in to mass; my bell doth more:
It cometh into court and pleads the cause
Of creatures dumb and unknown to the laws;
And this shall make, in every Christian clime,
The Bell of Atri famous for all time."



INTERLUDE

"Yes, well your story pleads the cause
Of those dumb mouths that have no speech,
Only a cry from each to each
In its own kind, with its own laws;
Something that is beyond the reach
Of human power to learn or teach,--
An inarticulate moan of pain,
Like the immeasurable main
Breaking upon an unknown beach."

Thus spake the Poet with a sigh;
Then added, with impassioned cry,
As one who feels the words he speaks,
The color flushing in his cheeks,
The fervor burning in his eye:
"Among the noblest in the land,
Though he may count himself the least,
That man I honor and revere
Who without favor, without fear,
In the great city dares to stand
The friend of every friendless beast,
And tames with his unflinching hand
The brutes that wear our form and face,
The were-wolves of the human race!"
Then paused, and waited with a frown,
Like some old champion of romance,
Who, having thrown his gauntlet down,
Expectant leans upon his lance;
But neither Knight nor Squire is found
To raise the gauntlet from the ground,
And try with him the battle's chance.

"Wake from your dreams, O Edrehi!
Or dreaming speak to us, and make
A feint of being half awake,
And tell us what your dreams may be.
Out of the hazy atmosphere
Of cloud-land deign to reappear
Among us in this Wayside Inn;
Tell us what visions and what scenes
Illuminate the dark ravines
In which you grope your way.  Begin!"

Thus the Sicilian spake.  The Jew
Made no reply, but only smiled,
As men unto a wayward child,
Not knowing what to answer, do.
As from a cavern's mouth, o'ergrown
With moss and intertangled vines,
A streamlet leaps into the light
And murmurs over root and stone
In a melodious undertone;
Or as amid the noonday night
Of sombre and wind-haunted pines,
There runs a sound as of the sea;
So from his bearded lips there came
A melody without a name,
A song, a tale, a history,
Or whatsoever it may be,
Writ and recorded in these lines.



THE SPANISH JEW'S TALE

KAMBALU

Into the city of Kambalu,
By the road that leadeth to Ispahan,
At the head of his dusty caravan,
Laden with treasure from realms afar,
Baldacca and Kelat and Kandahar,
Rode the great captain Alau.

The Khan from his palace-window gazed,
And saw in the thronging street beneath,
In the light of the setting sun, that blazed
Through the clouds of dust by the caravan raised,
The flash of harness and jewelled sheath,
And the shining scymitars of the guard,
And the weary camels that bared their teeth,
As they passed and passed through the gates unbarred
Into the shade of the palace-yard.

Thus into the city of Kambalu
Rode the great captain Alau;
And he stood before the Khan, and said:
"The enemies of my lord are dead;
All the Kalifs of all the West
Bow and obey thy least behest;
The plains are dark with the mulberry-trees,
The weavers are busy in Samarcand,
The miners are sifting the golden sand,
The divers plunging for pearls in the seas,
And peace and plenty are in the land.

"Baldacca's Kalif, and he alone,
Rose in revolt against thy throne:
His treasures are at thy palace-door,
With the swords and the shawls and the jewels he wore;
His body is dust o'er the desert blown.

"A mile outside of Baldacca's gate
I left my forces to lie in wait,
Concealed by forests and hillocks of sand,
And forward dashed with a handful of men,
To lure the old tiger from his den
Into the ambush I had planned.
Ere we reached the town the alarm was spread,
For we heard the sound of gongs from within;
And with clash of cymbals and warlike din
The gates swung wide; and we turned and fled;
And the garrison sallied forth and pursued,
With the gray old Kalif at their head,
And above them the banner of Mohammed:
So we snared them all, and the town was subdued.

"As in at the gate we rode, behold,
A tower that is called the Tower of Gold!
For there the Kalif had hidden his wealth,
Heaped and hoarded and piled on high,
Like sacks of wheat in a granary;
And thither the miser crept by stealth
To feel of the gold that gave him health,
And to gaze and gloat with his hungry eye
On jewels that gleamed like a glow-worm's spark,
Or the eyes of a panther in the dark.

"I said to the Kalif: 'Thou art old,
Thou hast no need of so much gold.
Thou shouldst not have heaped and hidden it here,
Till the breath of battle was hot and near,
But have sown through the land these useless hoards
To spring into shining blades of swords,
And keep thine honor sweet and clear.
These grains of gold are not grains of wheat;
These bars of silver thou canst not eat;
These jewels and pearls and precious stones
Cannot cure the aches in thy bones,
Nor keep the feet of Death one hour
From climbing the stairways of thy tower!'

"Then into his dungeon I locked the drone,
And left him to feed there all alone
In the honey-cells of his golden hive:
Never a prayer, nor a cry, nor a groan
Was heard from those massive walls of stone,
Nor again was the Kalif seen alive!

"When at last we unlocked the door,
We found him dead upon the floor;
The rings had dropped from his withered hands,
His teeth were like bones in the desert sands:
Still clutching his treasure he had died;
And as he lay there, he appeared
A statue of gold with a silver beard,
His arms outstretched as if crucified."

This is the story, strange and true,
That the great captain Alau
Told to his brother the Tartar Khan,
When he rode that day into Kambalu
By the road that leadeth to Ispahan.



INTERLUDE

"I thought before your tale began,"
The Student murmured, "we should have
Some legend written by Judah Rav
In his Gemara of Babylon;
Or something from the Gulistan,--
The tale of the Cazy of Hamadan,
Or of that King of Khorasan
Who saw in dreams the eyes of one
That had a hundred years been dead
Still moving restless in his head,
Undimmed, and gleaming with the lust
Of power, though all the rest was dust.

"But lo! your glittering caravan
On the road that leadeth to Ispahan
Hath led us farther to the East
Into the regions of Cathay.
Spite of your Kalif and his gold,
Pleasant has been the tale you told,
And full of color; that at least
No one will question or gainsay.
And yet on such a dismal day
We need a merrier tale to clear
The dark and heavy atmosphere.
So listen, Lordlings, while I tell,
Without a preface, what befell
A simple cobbler, in the year --
No matter; it was long ago;
And that is all we need to know."



THE STUDENT'S TALE

THE COBBLER OF HAGENAU

I trust that somewhere and somehow
You all have heard of Hagenau,
A quiet, quaint, and ancient town
Among the green Alsatian hills,
A place of valleys, streams, and mills,
Where Barbarossa's castle, brown
With rust of centuries, still looks down
On the broad, drowsy land below,--
On shadowy forests filled with game,
And the blue river winding slow
Through meadows, where the hedges grow
That give this little town its name.

It happened in the good old times,
While yet the Master-singers filled
The noisy workshop and the guild
With various melodies and rhymes,
That here in Hagenau there dwelt
A cobbler,--one who loved debate,
And, arguing from a postulate,
Would say what others only felt;
A man of forecast and of thrift,
And of a shrewd and careful mind
In this world's business, but inclined
Somewhat to let the next world drift.

Hans Sachs with vast delight he read,
And Regenbogen's rhymes of love,
For their poetic fame had spread
Even to the town of Hagenau;
And some Quick Melody of the Plough,
Or Double Harmony of the Dove,
Was always running in his head.
He kept, moreover, at his side,
Among his leathers and his tools,
Reynard the Fox, the Ship of Fools,
Or Eulenspiegel, open wide;
With these he was much edified:
He thought them wiser than the Schools.

His good wife, full of godly fear,
Liked not these worldly themes to hear;
The Psalter was her book of songs;
The only music to her ear
Was that which to the Church belongs,
When the loud choir on Sunday chanted,
And the two angels carved in wood,
That by the windy organ stood,
Blew on their trumpets loud and clear,
And all the echoes, far and near,
Gibbered as if the church were haunted.
Outside his door, one afternoon,
This humble votary of the muse
Sat in the narrow strip of shade
By a projecting cornice made,
Mending the Burgomaster's shoes,
And singing a familiar tune:--

 "Our ingress into the world
   Was naked and bare;
 Our progress through the world
   Is trouble and care;
 Our egress from the world
   Will be nobody knows where;
 But if we do well here
   We shall do well there;
 And I could tell you no more,
   Should I preach a whole year!"

Thus sang the cobbler at his work;
And with his gestures marked the time
Closing together with a jerk
Of his waxed thread the stitch and rhyme.
Meanwhile his quiet little dame
Was leaning o'er the window-sill,
Eager, excited, but mouse-still,
Gazing impatiently to see
What the great throng of folk might be
That onward in procession came,
Along the unfrequented street,
With horns that blew, and drums that beat,
And banners flying, and the flame
Of tapers, and, at times, the sweet
Voices of nuns; and as they sang
Suddenly all the church-bells rang.

In a gay coach, above the crowd,
There sat a monk in ample hood,
Who with his right hand held aloft
A red and ponderous cross of wood,
To which at times he meekly bowed.
In front three horsemen rode, and oft,
With voice and air importunate,
A boisterous herald cried aloud:
"The grace of God is at your gate!"
So onward to the church they passed.

The cobbler slowly tuned his last,
And, wagging his sagacious head,
Unto his kneeling housewife said:
"'Tis the monk Tetzel.  I have heard
The cawings of that reverend bird.
Don't let him cheat you of your gold;
Indulgence is not bought and sold."

The church of Hagenau, that night,
Was full of people, full of light;
An odor of incense filled the air,
The priest intoned, the organ groaned
Its inarticulate despair;
The candles on the altar blazed,
And full in front of it upraised
The red cross stood against the glare.
Below, upon the altar-rail
Indulgences were set to sale,
Like ballads at a country fair.
A heavy strong-box, iron-bound
And carved with many a quaint device,
Received, with a melodious sound,
The coin that purchased Paradise.

Then from the pulpit overhead,
Tetzel the monk, with fiery glow,
Thundered upon the crowd below.
"Good people all, draw near!" he said;
"Purchase these letters, signed and sealed,
By which all sins, though unrevealed
And unrepented, are forgiven!
Count but the gain, count not the loss
Your gold and silver are but dross,
And yet they pave the way to heaven.
I hear your mothers and your sires
Cry from their purgatorial fires,
And will ye not their ransom pay?
O senseless people! when the gate
Of heaven is open, will ye wait?
Will ye not enter in to-day?
To-morrow it will be too late;
I shall be gone upon my way.
Make haste! bring money while ye may!'

The women shuddered, and turned pale;
Allured by hope or driven by fear,
With many a sob and many a tear,
All crowded to the altar-rail.
Pieces of silver and of gold
Into the tinkling strong-box fell
Like pebbles dropped into a well;
And soon the ballads were all sold.
The cobbler's wife among the rest
Slipped into the capacious chest
A golden florin; then withdrew,
Hiding the paper in her breast;
And homeward through the darkness went
Comforted, quieted, content;
She did not walk, she rather flew,
A dove that settles to her nest,
When some appalling bird of prey
That scared her has been driven away.

The days went by, the monk was gone,
The summer passed, the winter came;
Though seasons changed, yet still the same
The daily round of life went on;
The daily round of household care,
The narrow life of toil and prayer.
But in her heart the cobbler's dame
Had now a treasure beyond price,
A secret joy without a name,
The certainty of Paradise.
Alas, alas!  Dust unto dust!
Before the winter wore away,
Her body in the churchyard lay,
Her patient soul was with the Just!
After her death, among the things
That even the poor preserve with care,--
Some little trinkets and cheap rings,
A locket with her mother's hair,
Her wedding gown, the faded flowers
She wore upon her wedding day,--
Among these memories of past hours,
That so much of the heart reveal,
Carefully kept and put away,
The Letter of Indulgence lay
Folded, with signature and seal.

Meanwhile the Priest, aggrieved and pained,
Waited and wondered that no word
Of mass or requiem he heard,
As by the Holy Church ordained;
Then to the Magistrate complained,
That as this woman had been dead
A week or more, and no mass said,
It was rank heresy, or at least
Contempt of Church; thus said the Priest;
And straight the cobbler was arraigned.

He came, confiding in his cause,
But rather doubtful of the laws.
The Justice from his elbow-chair
Gave him a look that seemed to say:
"Thou standest before a Magistrate,
Therefore do not prevaricate!"
Then asked him in a business way,
Kindly but cold: "Is thy wife dead?"
The cobbler meekly bowed his head;
"She is," came struggling from his throat
Scarce audibly.  The Justice wrote
The words down in a book, and then
Continued, as he raised his pen:
"She is; and hath a mass been said
For the salvation of her soul?
Come, speak the truth! confess the whole!"
The cobbler without pause replied:
"Of mass or prayer there was no need;
For at the moment when she died
Her soul was with the glorified!"
And from his pocket with all speed
He drew the priestly title-deed,
And prayed the Justice he would read.

The Justice read, amused, amazed;
And as he read his mirth increased;
At times his shaggy brows he raised,
Now wondering at the cobbler gazed,
Now archly at the angry Priest.
"From all excesses, sins, and crimes
Thou hast committed in past times
Thee I absolve!  And furthermore,
Purified from all earthly taints,
To the communion of the Saints
And to the sacraments restore!
All stains of weakness, and all trace
Of shame and censure I efface;
Remit the pains thou shouldst endure,
And make thee innocent and pure,
So that in dying, unto thee
The gates of heaven shall open be!
Though long thou livest, yet this grace
Until the moment of thy death
Unchangeable continueth!"

Then said he to the Priest: "I find
This document is duly signed
Brother John Tetzel, his own hand.
At all tribunals in the land
In evidence it may be used;
Therefore acquitted is the accused."
Then to the cobbler turned: "My friend,
Pray tell me, didst thou ever read
Reynard the Fox?"--"O yes, indeed!"--
"I thought so.  Don't forget the end."



INTERLUDE

"What was the end?  I am ashamed
Not to remember Reynard's fate;
I have not read the book of late;
Was he not hanged?" the Poet said.
The Student gravely shook his head,
And answered: "You exaggerate.
There was a tournament proclaimed,
And Reynard fought with Isegrim
The Wolf, and having vanquished him,
Rose to high honor in the State,
And Keeper of the Seals was named!"

At this the gay Sicilian laughed:
"Fight fire with fire, and craft with craft;
Successful cunning seems to be
The moral of your tale," said he.
"Mine had a better, and the Jew's
Had none at all, that I could see;
His aim was only to amuse."

Meanwhile from out its ebon case
His violin the Minstrel drew,
And having tuned its strings anew,
Now held it close in his embrace,
And poising in his outstretched hand
The bow, like a magician's wand,
He paused, and said, with beaming face:
"Last night my story was too long;
To-day I give you but a song,
An old tradition of the North;
But first, to put you in the mood,
I will a little while prelude,
And from this instrument draw forth
Something by way of overture."

He played; at first the tones were pure
And tender as a summer night,
The full moon climbing to her height,
The sob and ripple of the seas,
The flapping of an idle sail;
And then by sudden and sharp degrees
The multiplied, wild harmonies
Freshened and burst into a gale;
A tempest howling through the dark,
A crash as of some shipwrecked bark.
A loud and melancholy wail.

Such was the prelude to the tale
Told by the Minstrel; and at times
He paused amid its varying rhymes,
And at each pause again broke in
The music of his violin,
With tones of sweetness or of fear,
Movements of trouble or of calm,
Creating their own atmosphere;
As sitting in a church we hear
Between the verses of the psalm
The organ playing soft and clear,
Or thundering on the startled ear.



THE MUSICIAN'S TALE

THE BALLAD OF CARMILHAN

I

At Stralsund, by the Baltic Sea,
  Within the sandy bar,
At sunset of a summer's day,
Ready for sea, at anchor lay
  The good ship Valdemar.

The sunbeams danced upon the waves,
  And played along her side;
And through the cabin windows streamed
In ripples of golden light, that seemed
  The ripple of the tide.

There sat the captain with his friends,
  Old skippers brown and hale,
Who smoked and grumbled o'er their grog,
And talked of iceberg and of fog,
  Of calm and storm and gale.

And one was spinning a sailor's yarn
  About Klaboterman,
The Kobold of the sea; a spright
Invisible to mortal sight,
  Who o'er the rigging ran.

Sometimes he hammered in the hold,
  Sometimes upon the mast,
Sometimes abeam, sometimes abaft,
Or at the bows he sang and laughed,
  And made all tight and fast.

He helped the sailors at their work,
  And toiled with jovial din;
He helped them hoist and reef the sails,
He helped them stow the casks and bales,
  And heave the anchor in.

But woe unto the lazy louts,
  The idlers of the crew;
Them to torment was his delight,
And worry them by day and night,
  And pinch them black and blue.

And woe to him whose mortal eyes
  Klaboterman behold.
It is a certain sign of death!--
The cabin-boy here held his breath,
  He felt his blood run cold.



II

The jolly skipper paused awhile,
  And then again began;
"There is a Spectre Ship," quoth he,
"A ship of the Dead that sails the sea,
  And is called the Carmilhan.

"A ghostly ship, with a ghostly crew,
  In tempests she appears;
And before the gale, or against the gale,
She sails without a rag of sail,
  Without a helmsman steers.

"She haunts the Atlantic north and south,
  But mostly the mid-sea,
Where three great rocks rise bleak and bare
Like furnace-chimneys in the air,
  And are called the Chimneys Three.

"And ill betide the luckless ship
  That meets the Carmilhan;
Over her decks the seas will leap,
She must go down into the deep,
  And perish mouse and man."

The captain of the Valdemar
  Laughed loud with merry heart.
"I should like to see this ship," said he;
"I should like to find these Chimneys Three,
  That are marked down in the chart.

"I have sailed right over the spot," he said
  "With a good stiff breeze behind,
When the sea was blue, and the sky was clear,--
You can follow my course by these pinholes here,--
  And never a rock could find."

And then he swore a dreadful oath,
  He swore by the Kingdoms Three,
That, should he meet the Carmilhan,
He would run her down, although he ran
  Right into Eternity!

All this, while passing to and fro,
 The cabin-boy had heard;
He lingered at the door to hear,
And drank in all with greedy ear,
  And pondered every word.

He was a simple country lad,
  But of a roving mind.
"O, it must be like heaven," thought he,
"Those far-off foreign lands to see,
  And fortune seek and find!"

But in the fo'castle, when he heard
  The mariners blaspheme,
He thought of home, he thought of God,
And his mother under the churchyard sod,
  And wished it were a dream.

One friend on board that ship had he;
  'T was the Klaboterman,
Who saw the Bible in his chest,
And made a sign upon his breast,
  All evil things to ban.



III

The cabin windows have grown blank
  As eyeballs of the dead;
No more the glancing sunbeams burn
On the gilt letters of the stern,
  But on the figure-head;

On Valdemar Victorious,
  Who looketh with disdain
To see his image in the tide
Dismembered float from side to side,
  And reunite again.

"It is the wind," those skippers said,
  "That swings the vessel so;
It is the wind; it freshens fast,
'T is time to say farewell at last
  'T is time for us to go."

They shook the captain by the hand,
  "Goodluck! goodluck!" they cried;
Each face was like the setting sun,
As, broad and red, they one by one
  Went o'er the vessel's side.

The sun went down, the full moon rose,
  Serene o'er field and flood;
And all the winding creeks and bays
And broad sea-meadows seemed ablaze,
  The sky was red as blood.

The southwest wind blew fresh and fair,
  As fair as wind could be;
Bound for Odessa, o'er the bar,
With all sail set, the Valdemar
  Went proudly out to sea.

The lovely moon climbs up the sky
  As one who walks in dreams;
A tower of marble in her light,
A wall of black, a wall of white,
  The stately vessel seems.

Low down upon the sandy coast
  The lights begin to burn;
And now, uplifted high in air,
They kindle with a fiercer glare,
  And now drop far astern.

The dawn appears, the land is gone,
  The sea is all around;
Then on each hand low hills of sand
Emerge and form another land;
  She steereth through the Sound.

Through Kattegat and Skager-rack
  She flitteth like a ghost;
By day and night, by night and day,
She bounds, she flies upon her way
  Along the English coast.

Cape Finisterre is drawing near,
  Cape Finisterre is past;
Into the open ocean stream
She floats, the vision of a dream
  Too beautiful to last.

Suns rise and set, and rise, and yet
  There is no land in sight;
The liquid planets overhead
Burn brighter now the moon is dead,
  And longer stays the night.



IV

And now along the horizon's edge
  Mountains of cloud uprose,
Black as with forests underneath,
Above their sharp and jagged teeth
  Were white as drifted snows.

Unseen behind them sank the sun,
  But flushed each snowy peak
A little while with rosy light
That faded slowly from the sight
  As blushes from the cheek.

Black grew the sky,--all black, all black;
  The clouds were everywhere;
There was a feeling of suspense
In nature, a mysterious sense
  Of terror in the air.

And all on board the Valdemar
  Was still as still could be;
Save when the dismal ship-bell tolled,
As ever and anon she rolled,
  And lurched into the sea.

The captain up and down the deck
  Went striding to and fro;
Now watched the compass at the wheel,
Now lifted up his hand to feel
  Which way the wind might blow.

And now he looked up at the sails,
  And now upon the deep;
In every fibre of his frame
He felt the storm before it came,
  He had no thought of sleep.

Eight bells! and suddenly abaft,
  With a great rush of rain,
Making the ocean white with spume,
In darkness like the day of doom,
  On came the hurricane.

The lightning flashed from cloud to cloud,
  And rent the sky in two;
A jagged flame, a single jet
Of white fire, like a bayonet
  That pierced the eyeballs through.

Then all around was dark again,
  And blacker than before;
But in that single flash of light
He had beheld a fearful sight,
  And thought of the oath he swore.

For right ahead lay the Ship of the Dead,
  The ghostly Carmilhan!
Her masts were stripped, her yards were bare,
And on her bowsprit, poised in air,
  Sat the Klaboterman.

Her crew of ghosts was all on deck
  Or clambering up the shrouds;
The boatswain's whistle, the captain's hail,
Were like the piping of the gale,
  And thunder in the clouds.

And close behind the Carmilhan
  There rose up from the sea,
As from a foundered ship of stone,
Three bare and splintered masts alone:
  They were the Chimneys Three.

And onward dashed the Valdemar
  And leaped into the dark;
A denser mist, a colder blast,
A little shudder, and she had passed
  Right through the Phantom Bark.

She cleft in twain the shadowy hulk,
  But cleft it unaware;
As when, careering to her nest,
The sea-gull severs with her breast
  The unresisting air.

Again the lightning flashed; again
  They saw the Carmilhan,
Whole as before in hull and spar;
But now on board of the Valdemar
  Stood the Klaboterman.

And they all knew their doom was sealed;
  They knew that death was near;
Some prayed who never prayed before,
And some they wept, and some they swore,
  And some were mute with fear.

Then suddenly there came a shock,
  And louder than wind or sea
A cry burst from the crew on deck,
As she dashed and crashed, a hopeless wreck,
  Upon the Chimneys Three.

The storm and night were passed, the light
  To streak the east began;
The cabin-boy, picked up at sea,
Survived the wreck, and only he,
  To tell of the Carmilhan.



INTERLUDE

When the long murmur of applause
That greeted the Musician's lay
Had slowly buzzed itself away,
And the long talk of Spectre Ships
That followed died upon their lips
And came unto a natural pause,
"These tales you tell are one and all
Of the Old World," the Poet said,
"Flowers gathered from a crumbling wall,
Dead leaves that rustle as they fall;
Let me present you in their stead
Something of our New England earth,
A tale which, though of no great worth,
Has still this merit, that it yields
A certain freshness of the fields,
A sweetness as of home-made bread."

The Student answered: "Be discreet;
For if the flour be fresh and sound,
And if the bread be light and sweet,
Who careth in what mill 't was ground,
Or of what oven felt the heat,
Unless, as old Cervantes said,
You are looking after better bread
Than any that is made of wheat?
You know that people nowadays
To what is old give little praise;
All must be new in prose and verse:
They want hot bread, or something worse,
Fresh every morning, and half baked;
The wholesome bread of yesterday,
Too stale for them, is thrown away,
Nor is their thirst with water slaked.

As oft we see the sky in May
Threaten to rain, and yet not rain,
The Poet's face, before so gay,
Was clouded with a look of pain,
But suddenly brightened up again;
And without further let or stay
He told his tale of yesterday.



THE POET'S TALE

LADY WENTWORTH.

One hundred years ago, and something more,
In Queen Street, Portsmouth, at her tavern door,
Neat as a pin, and blooming as a rose,
Stood Mistress Stavers in her furbelows,
Just as her cuckoo-clock was striking nine.
Above her head, resplendent on the sign,
The portrait of the Earl of Halifax,
In scarlet coat and periwig of flax,
Surveyed at leisure all her varied charms,
Her cap, her bodice, her white folded arms,
And half resolved, though he was past his prime,
And rather damaged by the lapse of time,
To fall down at her feet and to declare
The passion that had driven him to despair.
For from his lofty station he had seen
Stavers, her husband, dressed in bottle-green,
Drive his new Flying Stage-coach, four in hand,
Down the long lane, and out into the land,
And knew that he was far upon the way
To Ipswich and to Boston on the Bay!

Just then the meditations of the Earl
Were interrupted by a little girl,
Barefooted, ragged, with neglected hair,
Eyes full of laughter, neck and shoulders bare,
A thin slip of a girl, like a new moon,
Sure to be rounded into beauty soon,
A creature men would worship and adore,
Though now in mean habiliments she bore
A pail of water, dripping, through the street
And bathing, as she went her naked feet.

It was a pretty picture, full of grace,--
The slender form, the delicate, thin face;
The swaying motion, as she hurried by;
The shining feet, the laughter in her eye,
That o'er her face in ripples gleamed and glanced,
As in her pail the shifting sunbeam danced:
And with uncommon feelings of delight
The Earl of Halifax beheld the sight.
Not so Dame Stavers, for he heard her say
These words, or thought he did, as plain as day:
"O Martha Hilton!  Fie! how dare you go
About the town half dressed, and looking so!"
At which the gypsy laughed, and straight replied:
"No matter how I look; I yet shall ride
In my own chariot, ma'am."  And on the child
The Earl of Halifax benignly smiled,
As with her heavy burden she passed on,
Looked back, then turned the corner, and was gone.

What next, upon that memorable day,
Arrested his attention was a gay
And brilliant equipage, that flashed and spun,
The silver harness glittering in the sun,
Outriders with red jackets, lithe and lank,
Pounding the saddles as they rose and sank,
While all alone within the chariot sat
A portly person with three-cornered hat,
A crimson velvet coat, head high in air,
Gold-headed cane, and nicely powdered hair,
And diamond buckles sparkling at his knees,
Dignified, stately, florid, much at ease.
Onward the pageant swept, and as it passed,
Fair Mistress Stavers courtesied low and fast;
For this was Governor Wentworth, driving down
To Little Harbor, just beyond the town,
Where his Great House stood looking out to sea,
A goodly place, where it was good to be.

It was a pleasant mansion, an abode
Near and yet hidden from the great high-road,
Sequestered among trees, a noble pile,
Baronial and colonial in its style;
Gables and dormer-windows everywhere,
And stacks of chimneys rising high in air,--
Pandaean pipes, on which all winds that blew
Made mournful music the whole winter through.
Within, unwonted splendors met the eye,
Panels, and floors of oak, and tapestry;
Carved chimney-pieces, where on brazen dogs
Revelled and roared the Christmas fires of logs;
Doors opening into darkness unawares,
Mysterious passages, and flights of stairs;
And on the walls, in heavy gilded frames,
The ancestral Wentworths with Old-Scripture names.

Such was the mansion where the great man dwelt.
A widower and childless; and he felt
The loneliness, the uncongenial gloom,
That like a presence haunted ever room;
For though not given to weakness, he could feel
The pain of wounds, that ache because they heal.

The years came and the years went,--seven in all,
And passed in cloud and sunshine o'er the Hall;
The dawns their splendor through its chambers shed,
The sunsets flushed its western windows red;
The snow was on its roofs, the wind, the rain;
Its woodlands were in leaf and bare again;
Moons waxed and waned, the lilacs bloomed and died,
In the broad river ebbed and flowed the tide,
Ships went to sea, and ships came home from sea,
And the slow years sailed by and ceased to be.

And all these years had Martha Hilton served
In the Great House, not wholly unobserved:
By day, by night, the silver crescent grew,
Though hidden by clouds, her light still shining through;
A maid of all work, whether coarse or fine,
A servant who made service seem divine!
Through her each room was fair to look upon;
The mirrors glistened, and the brasses shone,
The very knocker on the outer door,
If she but passed, was brighter than before.

And now the ceaseless turning of the mill
Of Time, that never for an hour stands still,
Ground out the Governor's sixtieth birthday,
And powdered his brown hair with silver-gray.
The robin, the forerunner of the spring,
The bluebird with his jocund carolling,
The restless swallows building in the eaves,
The golden buttercups, the grass, the leaves,
The lilacs tossing in the winds of May,
All welcomed this majestic holiday!
He gave a splendid banquet served on plate,
Such as became the Governor of the State,
Who represented England and the King,
And was magnificent in everything.
He had invited all his friends and peers,--
The Pepperels, the Langdons, and the Lears,
The Sparhawks, the Penhallows, and the rest;
For why repeat the name of every guest?
But I must mention one, in bands and gown,
The rector there, the Reverend Arthur Brown
Of the Established Church; with smiling face
He sat beside the Governor and said grace;
And then the feast went on, as others do,
But ended as none other I e'er knew.

When they had drunk the King, with many a cheer,
The Governor whispered in a servant's ear,
Who disappeared and presently there stood
Within the room, in perfect womanhood,
A maiden, modest and yet self-possessed,
Youthful and beautiful, and simply dressed.
Can this be Martha Hilton?  It must be!
Yes, Martha Hilton, and no other she!
Dowered with the beauty of her twenty years,
How ladylike, how queenlike she appears;
The pale, thin crescent of the days gone by
Is Dian now in all her majesty!
Yet scarce a guest perceived that she was there,
Until the Governor, rising from his chair,
Played slightly with his ruffles, then looked down,
And said unto the Reverend Arthur Brown:
"This is my birthday: it shall likewise be
My wedding-day; and you shall marry me!"

The listening guests were greatly mystified,
None more so than the rector, who replied:
"Marry you?  Yes, that were a pleasant task,
Your Excellency; but to whom? I ask."
The Governor answered: "To this lady here"
And beckoned Martha Hilton to draw near.
She came and stood, all blushes, at his side.
The rector paused.  The impatient Governor cried:
"This is the lady; do you hesitate?
Then I command you as Chief Magistrate."
The rector read the service loud and clear:
"Dearly beloved, we are gathered here,"
And so on to the end.  At his command
On the fourth finger of her fair left hand
The Governor placed the ring; and that was all:
Martha was Lady Wentworth of the Hall!



INTERLUDE.

Well pleased the audience heard the tale.
The Theologian said: "Indeed,
To praise you there is little need;
One almost hears the farmers flail
Thresh out your wheat, nor does there fail
A certain freshness, as you said,
And sweetness as of home-made bread.
But not less sweet and not less fresh
Are many legends that I know,
Writ by the monks of long-ago,
Who loved to mortify the flesh,
So that the soul might purer grow,
And rise to a diviner state;
And one of these--perhaps of all
Most beautiful--I now recall,
And with permission will narrate;
Hoping thereby to make amends
For that grim tragedy of mine,
As strong and black as Spanish wine,
I told last night, and wish almost
It had remained untold, my friends;
For Torquemada's awful ghost
Came to me in the dreams I dreamed,
And in the darkness glared and gleamed
Like a great lighthouse on the coast."

The Student laughing said: "Far more
Like to some dismal fire of bale
Flaring portentous on a hill;
Or torches lighted on a shore
By wreckers in a midnight gale.
No matter; be it as you will,
Only go forward with your tale."



THE THEOLOGIAN'S TALE

THE LEGEND BEAUTIFUL

"Hads't thou stayed, I must have fled!"
That is what the Vision said.

In his chamber all alone,
Kneeling on the floor of stone,
Prayed the Monk in deep contrition
For his sins of indecision,
Prayed for greater self-denial
In temptation and in trial;
It was noonday by the dial,
And the Monk was all alone.

Suddenly, as if it lightened,
An unwonted splendor brightened
All within him and without him
In that narrow cell of stone;
And he saw the Blessed Vision
Of our Lord, with light Elysian
Like a vesture wrapped about him,
Like a garment round him thrown.

Not as crucified and slain,
Not in agonies of pain,
Not with bleeding hands and feet,
Did the Monk his Master see;
But as in the village street,
In the house or harvest-field,
Halt and lame and blind he healed,
When he walked in Galilee.

In an attitude imploring,
Hands upon his bosom crossed,
Wondering, worshipping, adoring,
Knelt the Monk in rapture lost.
Lord, he thought, in heaven that reignest,
Who am I, that thus thou deignest
To reveal thyself to me?
Who am I, that from the centre
Of thy glory thou shouldst enter
This poor cell, my guest to be?

Then amid his exaltation,
Loud the convent bell appalling,
From its belfry calling, calling,
Rang through court and corridor
With persistent iteration
He had never heard before.
It was now the appointed hour
When alike in shine or shower,
Winter's cold or summer's heat,
To the convent portals came
All the blind and halt and lame,
All the beggars of the street,
For their daily dole of food
Dealt them by the brotherhood;
And their almoner was he
Who upon his bended knee,
Rapt in silent ecstasy
Of divinest self-surrender,
Saw the Vision and the Splendor.

Deep distress and hesitation
Mingled with his adoration;
Should he go, or should he stay?
Should he leave the poor to wait
Hungry at the convent gate,
Till the Vision passed away?
Should he slight his radiant guest,
Slight this visitant celestial,
For a crowd of ragged, bestial
Beggars at the convent gate?
Would the Vision there remain?
Would the Vision come again?
Then a voice within his breast
Whispered, audible and clear
As if to the outward ear:
"Do thy duty; that is best;
Leave unto thy Lord the rest!"

Straightway to his feet he started,
And with longing look intent
On the Blessed Vision bent,
Slowly from his cell departed,
Slowly on his errand went.

At the gate the poor were waiting,
Looking through the iron grating,
With that terror in the eye
That is only seen in those
Who amid their wants and woes
Hear the sound of doors that close,
And of feet that pass them by;
Grown familiar with disfavor,
Grown familiar with the savor
Of the bread by which men die!
But to-day, they knew not why,
Like the gate of Paradise
Seemed the convent sate to rise,
Like a sacrament divine
Seemed to them the bread and wine.
In his heart the Monk was praying,
Thinking of the homeless poor,
What they suffer and endure;
What we see not, what we see;
And the inward voice was saying:
"Whatsoever thing thou doest
To the least of mine and lowest,
That thou doest unto me!"

Unto me! but had the Vision
Come to him in beggar's clothing,
Come a mendicant imploring,
Would he then have knelt adoring,
Or have listened with derision,
And have turned away with loathing.

Thus his conscience put the question,
Full of troublesome suggestion,
As at length, with hurried pace,
Towards his cell he turned his face,
And beheld the convent bright
With a supernatural light,
Like a luminous cloud expanding
Over floor and wall and ceiling.

But he paused with awe-struck feeling
At the threshold of his door,
For the Vision still was standing
As he left it there before,
When the convent bell appalling,
From its belfry calling, calling,
Summoned him to feed the poor.
Through the long hour intervening
It had waited his return,
And he felt his bosom burn,
Comprehending all the meaning,
When the Blessed Vision said,
"Hadst thou stayed, I must have fled!"



INTERLUDE.

All praised the Legend more or less;
Some liked the moral, some the verse;
Some thought it better, and some worse
Than other legends of the past;
Until, with ill-concealed distress
At all their cavilling, at last
The Theologian gravely said:
"The Spanish proverb, then, is right;
Consult your friends on what you do,
And one will say that it is white,
And others say that it is red."
And "Amen!" quoth the Spanish Jew.

"Six stories told!  We must have seven,
A cluster like the Pleiades,
And lo! it happens, as with these,
That one is missing from our heaven.
Where is the Landlord?  Bring him here;
Let the Lost Pleiad reappear."

Thus the Sicilian cried, and went
Forthwith to seek his missing star,
But did not find him in the bar,
A place that landlords most frequent,
Nor yet beside the kitchen fire,
Nor up the stairs, nor in the hall;
It was in vain to ask or call,
There were no tidings of the Squire.

So he came back with downcast head,
Exclaiming: "Well, our bashful host
Hath surely given up the ghost.
Another proverb says the dead
Can tell no tales; and that is true.
It follows, then, that one of you
Must tell a story in his stead.
You must," he to the Student said,
"Who know so many of the best,
And tell them better than the rest."
Straight by these flattering words beguiled,
The Student, happy as a child
When he is called a little man,
Assumed the double task imposed,
And without more ado unclosed
His smiling lips, and thus began.



THE STUDENT'S SECOND TALE

THE BARON OF ST. CASTINE

Baron Castine of St. Castine
Has left his chateau in the Pyrenees,
And sailed across the western seas.
When he went away from his fair demesne
The birds were building, the woods were green;
And now the winds of winter blow
Round the turrets of the old chateau,
The birds are silent and unseen,
The leaves lie dead in the ravine,
And the Pyrenees are white with snow.

His father, lonely, old, and gray,
Sits by the fireside day by day,
Thinking ever one thought of care;
Through the southern windows, narrow and tall,
The sun shines into the ancient hall,
And makes a glory round his hair.
The house-dog, stretched beneath his chair,
Groans in his sleep as if in pain
Then wakes, and yawns, and sleeps again,
So silent is it everywhere,--
So silent you can hear the mouse
Run and rummage along the beams
Behind the wainscot of the wall;
And the old man rouses from his dreams,
And wanders restless through the house,
As if he heard strange voices call.

His footsteps echo along the floor
Of a distant passage, and pause awhile;
He is standing by an open door
Looking long, with a sad, sweet smile,
Into the room of his absent son.
There is the bed on which he lay,
There are the pictures bright and gay,
Horses and hounds and sun-lit seas;
There are his powder-flask and gun,
And his hunting-knives in shape of a fan;
The chair by the window where he sat,
With the clouded tiger-skin for a mat,
Looking out on the Pyrenees,
Looking out on Mount Marbore
And the Seven Valleys of Lavedan.
Ah me! he turns away and sighs;
There is a mist before his eyes.

At night whatever the weather be,
Wind or rain or starry heaven,
Just as the clock is striking seven,
Those who look from the windows see
The village Curate, with lantern and maid,
Come through the gateway from the park
And cross the courtyard damp and dark,--
A ring of light in a ring of shade.

And now at the old man's side he stands,
His voice is cheery, his heart expands,
He gossips pleasantly, by the blaze
Of the fire of fagots, about old days,
And Cardinal Mazarin and the Fronde,
And the Cardinal's nieces fair and fond,
And what they did, and what they said,
When they heard his Eminence was dead.

And after a pause the old man says,
His mind still coming back again
To the one sad thought that haunts his brain,
"Are there any tidings from over sea?
Ah, why has that wild boy gone from me?"
And the Curate answers, looking down,
Harmless and docile as a lamb,
"Young blood! young blood!  It must so be!"
And draws from the pocket of his gown
A handkerchief like an oriflamb,
And wipes his spectacles, and they play
Their little game of lansquenet
In silence for an hour or so,
Till the clock at nine strikes loud and clear
From the village lying asleep below,
And across the courtyard, into the dark
Of the winding pathway in the park,
Curate and lantern disappear,
And darkness reigns in the old chateau.

The ship has come back from over sea,
She has been signalled from below,
And into the harbor of Bordeaux
She sails with her gallant company.
But among them is nowhere seen
The brave young Baron of St. Castine;
He hath tarried behind, I ween,
In the beautiful land of Acadie!

And the father paces to and fro
Through the chambers of the old chateau,
Waiting, waiting to hear the hum
Of wheels on the road that runs below,
Of servants hurrying here and there,
The voice in the courtyard, the step on the stair,
Waiting for some one who doth not come!
But letters there are, which the old man reads
To the Curate, when he comes at night
Word by word, as an acolyte
Repeats his prayers and tells his beads;
Letters full of the rolling sea,
Full of a young man's joy to be
Abroad in the world, alone and free;
Full of adventures and wonderful scenes
Of hunting the deer through forests vast
In the royal grant of Pierre du Gast;
Of nights in the tents of the Tarratines;
Of Madocawando the Indian chief,
And his daughters, glorious as queens,
And beautiful beyond belief;
And so soft the tones of their native tongue,
The words are not spoken, they are sung!

And the Curate listens, and smiling says:
"Ah yes, dear friend! in our young days
We should have liked to hunt the deer
All day amid those forest scenes,
And to sleep in the tents of the Tarratines;
But now it is better sitting here
Within four walls, and without the fear
Of losing our hearts to Indian queens;
For man is fire and woman is tow,
And the Somebody comes and begins to blow."
Then a gleam of distrust and vague surmise
Shines in the father's gentle eyes,
As fire-light on a window-pane
Glimmers and vanishes again;
But naught he answers; he only sighs,
And for a moment bows his head;
Then, as their custom is, they play
Their little gain of lansquenet,
And another day is with the dead.

Another day, and many a day
And many a week and month depart,
When a fatal letter wings its way
Across the sea, like a bird of prey,
And strikes and tears the old man's heart.
Lo! the young Baron of St. Castine,
Swift as the wind is, and as wild,
Has married a dusky Tarratine,
Has married Madocawando's child!

The letter drops from the father's hand;
Though the sinews of his heart are wrung,
He utters no cry, he breathes no prayer,
No malediction falls from his tongue;
But his stately figure, erect and grand,
Bends and sinks like a column of sand
In the whirlwind of his great despair.
Dying, yes, dying!  His latest breath
Of parley at the door of death
Is a blessing on his wayward son.
Lower and lower on his breast
Sinks his gray head; he is at rest;
No longer he waits for any one;

For many a year the old chateau
Lies tenantless and desolate;
Rank grasses in the courtyard grow,
About its gables caws the crow;
Only the porter at the gate
Is left to guard it, and to wait
The coming of the rightful heir;
No other life or sound is there;
No more the Curate comes at night,
No more is seen the unsteady light,
Threading the alleys of the park;
The windows of the hall are dark,
The chambers dreary, cold, and bare!

At length, at last, when the winter is past,
And birds are building, and woods are green,
With flying skirts is the Curate seen
Speeding along the woodland way,
Humming gayly, "No day is so long
But it comes at last to vesper-song."
He stops at the porter's lodge to say
That at last the Baron of St. Castine
Is coming home with his Indian queen,
Is coming without a week's delay;
And all the house must be swept and clean,
And all things set in good array!
And the solemn porter shakes his head;
And the answer he makes is: "Lackaday!
We will see, as the blind man said!"

Alert since first the day began,
The cock upon the village church
Looks northward from his airy perch,
As if beyond the ken of man
To see the ships come sailing on,
And pass the isle of Oleron,
And pass the Tower of Cordouan.

In the church below is cold in clay
The heart that would have leaped for joy--
O tender heart of truth and trust!--
To see the coming of that day;
In the church below the lips are dust;
Dust are the hands, and dust the feet,
That would have been so swift to meet
The coming of that wayward boy.

At night the front of the old chateau
Is a blaze of light above and below;
There's a sound of wheels and hoofs in the street,
A cracking of whips, and scamper of feet,
Bells are ringing, and horns are blown,
And the Baron hath come again to his own.
The Curate is waiting in the hall,
Most eager and alive of all
To welcome the Baron and Baroness;
But his mind is full of vague distress,
For he hath read in Jesuit books
Of those children of the wilderness,
And now, good, simple man! he looks
To see a painted savage stride
Into the room, with shoulders bare,
And eagle feathers in her hair,
And around her a robe of panther's hide.

Instead, he beholds with secret shame
A form of beauty undefined,
A loveliness with out a name,
Not of degree, but more of kind;
Nor bold nor shy, nor short nor tall,
But a new mingling of them all.
Yes, beautiful beyond belief,
Transfigured and transfused, he sees
The lady of the Pyrenees,
The daughter of the Indian chief.

Beneath the shadow of her hair
The gold-bronze color of the skin
Seems lighted by a fire within,
As when a burst of sunlight shines
Beneath a sombre grove of pines,--
A dusky splendor in the air.
The two small hands, that now are pressed
In his, seem made to be caressed,
They lie so warm and soft and still,
Like birds half hidden in a nest,
Trustful, and innocent of ill.
And ah! he cannot believe his ears
When her melodious voice he hears
Speaking his native Gascon tongue;
The words she utters seem to be
Part of some poem of Goudouli,
They are not spoken, they are sung!
And the Baron smiles, and says, "You see,
I told you but the simple truth;
Ah, you may trust the eyes of youth!"

Down in the village day by day
The people gossip in their way,
And stare to see the Baroness pass
On Sunday morning to early Mass;
And when she kneeleth down to pray,
They wonder, and whisper together, and say,
"Surely this is no heathen lass!"
And in course of time they learn to bless
The Baron and the Baroness.

And in course of time the Curate learns
A secret so dreadful, that by turns
He is ice and fire, he freezes and burns.
The Baron at confession hath said,
That though this woman be his wife,
He bath wed her as the Indians wed,
He hath bought her for a gun and a knife!
And the Curate replies: "O profligate,
O Prodigal Son! return once more
To the open arms and the open door
Of the Church, or ever it be too late.
Thank God, thy father did not live
To see what he could not forgive;
On thee, so reckless and perverse,
He left his blessing, not his curse.
But the nearer the dawn the darker the night,
And by going wrong all things come right;
Things have been mended that were worse,
And the worse, the nearer they are to mend.
For the sake of the living and the dead,
Thou shalt be wed as Christians wed,
And all things come to a happy end."

O sun, that followest the night,
In yon blue sky, serene and pure,
And pourest thine impartial light
Alike on mountain and on moor,
Pause for a moment in thy course,
And bless the bridegroom and the bride!
O Gave, that from thy hidden source
In you mysterious mountain-side
Pursuest thy wandering way alone,
And leaping down its steps of stone,
Along the meadow-lands demure
Stealest away to the Adour,
Pause for a moment in thy course
To bless the bridegroom and the bride!

The choir is singing the matin song,
The doors of the church are opened wide,
The people crowd, and press, and throng
To see the bridegroom and the bride.
They enter and pass along the nave;
They stand upon the father's grave;
The bells are ringing soft and slow;
The living above and the dead below
Give their blessing on one and twain;
The warm wind blows from the hills of Spain,
The birds are building, the leaves are green,
And Baron Castine of St. Castine
Hath come at last to his own again.



FINALE

"Nunc plaudite!" the Student cried,
When he had finished; "now applaud,
As Roman actors used to say
At the conclusion of a play";
And rose, and spread his hands abroad,
And smiling bowed from side to side,
As one who bears the palm away.
And generous was the applause and loud,
But less for him than for the sun,
That even as the tale was done
Burst from its canopy of cloud,
And lit the landscape with the blaze
Of afternoon on autumn days,
And filled the room with light, and made
The fire of logs a painted shade.

A sudden wind from out the west
Blew all its trumpets loud and shrill;
The windows rattled with the blast,
The oak-trees shouted as it passed,
And straight, as if by fear possessed,
The cloud encampment on the hill
Broke up, and fluttering flag and tent
Vanished into the firmament,
And down the valley fled amain
The rear of the retreating rain.

Only far up in the blue sky
A mass of clouds, like drifted snow
Suffused with a faint Alpine glow,
Was heaped together, vast and high,
On which a shattered rainbow hung,
Not rising like the ruined arch
Of some aerial aqueduct,
But like a roseate garland plucked
From an Olympian god, and flung
Aside in his triumphal march.

Like prisoners from their dungeon gloom,
Like birds escaping from a snare,
Like school-boys at the hour of play,
All left at once the pent-up room,
And rushed into the open air;
And no more tales were told that day.



PART THIRD

PRELUDE

The evening came; the golden vane
A moment in the sunset glanced,
Then darkened, and then gleamed again,
As from the east the moon advanced
And touched it with a softer light;
While underneath, with flowing mane,
Upon the sign the Red Horse pranced,
And galloped forth into the night.

But brighter than the afternoon
That followed the dark day of rain,
And brighter than the golden vane
That glistened in the rising moon,
Within the ruddy fire-light gleamed;
And every separate window-pane,
Backed by the outer darkness, showed
A mirror, where the flamelets gleamed
And flickered to and fro, and seemed
A bonfire lighted in the road.

Amid the hospitable glow,
Like an old actor on the stage,
With the uncertain voice of age,
The singing chimney chanted low
The homely songs of long ago.

The voice that Ossian heard of yore,
When midnight winds were in his hall;
A ghostly and appealing call,
A sound of days that are no more!
And dark as Ossian sat the Jew,
And listened to the sound, and knew
The passing of the airy hosts,
The gray and misty cloud of ghosts
In their interminable flight;
And listening muttered in his beard,
With accent indistinct and weird,
"Who are ye, children of the Night?"

Beholding his mysterious face,
"Tell me," the gay Sicilian said,
"Why was it that in breaking bread
At supper, you bent down your head
And, musing, paused a little space,
As one who says a silent grace?"

The Jew replied, with solemn air,
"I said the Manichaean's prayer.
It was his faith,--perhaps is mine,--
That life in all its forms is one,
And that its secret conduits run
Unseen, but in unbroken line,
From the great fountain-head divine
Through man and beast, through grain and grass.
Howe'er we struggle, strive, and cry,
From death there can be no escape,
And no escape from life, alas
Because we cannot die, but pass
From one into another shape:
It is but into life we die.

"Therefore the Manichaean said
This simple prayer on breaking bread,
Lest he with hasty hand or knife
Might wound the incarcerated life,
The soul in things that we call dead:
'I did not reap thee, did not bind thee,
I did not thrash thee, did not grind thee,
Nor did I in the oven bake thee!
It was not I, it was another
Did these things unto thee, O brother;
I only have thee, hold thee, break thee!'"

"That birds have souls I can concede,"
The poet cried, with glowing cheeks;
"The flocks that from their beds of reed
Uprising north or southward fly,
And flying write upon the sky
The biforked letter of the Greeks,
As hath been said by Rucellai;
All birds that sing or chirp or cry,
Even those migratory bands,
The minor poets of the air,
The plover, peep, and sanderling,
That hardly can be said to sing,
But pipe along the barren sands,--
All these have souls akin to ours;
So hath the lovely race of flowers:
Thus much I grant, but nothing more.
The rusty hinges of a door
Are not alive because they creak;
This chimney, with its dreary roar,
These rattling windows, do not speak!"
"To me they speak," the Jew replied;
"And in the sounds that sink and soar,
I hear the voices of a tide
That breaks upon an unknown shore!"

Here the Sicilian interfered:
"That was your dream, then, as you dozed
A moment since, with eyes half-closed,
And murmured something in your beard."

The Hebrew smiled, and answered, "Nay;
Not that, but something very near;
Like, and yet not the same, may seem
The vision of my waking dream;
Before it wholly dies away,
Listen to me, and you shall hear."



THE SPANISH JEW'S TALE

AZRAEL

King Solomon, before his palace gate
At evening, on the pavement tessellate
Was walking with a stranger from the East,
Arrayed in rich attire as for a feast,
The mighty Runjeet-Sing, a learned man,
And Rajah of the realms of Hindostan.
And as they walked the guest became aware
Of a white figure in the twilight air,
Gazing intent, as one who with surprise
His form and features seemed to recognize;
And in a whisper to the king he said:
"What is yon shape, that, pallid as the dead,
Is watching me, as if he sought to trace
In the dim light the features of my face?"

The king looked, and replied: "I know him well;
It is the Angel men call Azrael,
'T is the Death Angel; what hast thou to fear?"
And the guest answered: "Lest he should come near,
And speak to me, and take away my breath!
Save me from Azrael, save me from death!
O king, that hast dominion o'er the wind,
Bid it arise and bear me hence to Ind."

The king gazed upward at the cloudless sky,
Whispered a word, and raised his hand on high,
And lo! the signet-ring of chrysoprase
On his uplifted finger seemed to blaze
With hidden fire, and rushing from the west
There came a mighty wind, and seized the guest
And lifted him from earth, and on they passed,
His shining garments streaming in the blast,
A silken banner o'er the walls upreared,
A purple cloud, that gleamed and disappeared.
Then said the Angel, smiling: "If this man
Be Rajah Runjeet-Sing of Hindostan,
Thou hast done well in listening to his prayer;
I was upon my way to seek him there."



INTERLUDE.

"O Edrehi, forbear to-night
Your ghostly legends of affright,
And let the Talmud rest in peace;
Spare us your dismal tales of death
That almost take away one's breath;
So doing, may your tribe increase."

Thus the Sicilian said; then went
And on the spinet's rattling keys
Played Marianina, like a breeze
From Naples and the Southern seas,
That brings us the delicious scent
Of citron and of orange trees,
And memories of soft days of ease
At Capri and Amalfi spent.

"Not so," the eager Poet said;
"At least, not so before I tell
The story of my Azrael,
An angel mortal as ourselves,
Which in an ancient tome I found
Upon a convent's dusty shelves,
Chained with an iron chain, and bound
In parchment, and with clasps of brass,
Lest from its prison, some dark day,
It might be stolen or steal away,
While the good friars were singing mass.

"It is a tale of Charlemagne,
When like a thunder-cloud, that lowers
And sweeps from mountain-crest to coast,
With lightning flaming through its showers,
He swept across the Lombard plain,
Beleaguering with his warlike train
Pavia, the country's pride and boast,
The City of the Hundred Towers."
Thus heralded the tale began,
And thus in sober measure ran.



THE POET'S TALE

CHARLEMAGNE

Olger the Dane and Desiderio,
King of the Lombards, on a lofty tower
Stood gazing northward o'er the rolling plains,
League after league of harvests, to the foot
Of the snow-crested Alps, and saw approach
A mighty army, thronging all the roads
That led into the city.  And the King
Said unto Olger, who had passed his youth
As hostage at the court of France, and knew
The Emperor's form and face "Is Charlemagne
Among that host?"  And Olger answered: "No."

And still the innumerable multitude
Flowed onward and increased, until the King
Cried in amazement: "Surely Charlemagne
Is coming in the midst of all these knights!"
And Olger answered slowly: "No; not yet;
He will not come so soon."  Then much disturbed
King Desiderio asked: "What shall we do,
if he approach with a still greater army!"
And Olger answered: "When he shall appear,
You will behold what manner of man he is;
But what will then befall us I know not."

Then came the guard that never knew repose,
The Paladins of France; and at the sight
The Lombard King o'ercome with terror cried:
"This must be Charlemagne!" and as before
Did Olger answer: "No; not yet, not yet."

And then appeared in panoply complete
The Bishops and the Abbots and the Priests
Of the imperial chapel, and the Counts
And Desiderio could no more endure
The light of day, nor yet encounter death,
But sobbed aloud and said: "Let us go down
And hide us in the bosom of the earth,
Far from the sight and anger of a foe
So terrible as this!"  And Olger said:
"When you behold the harvests in the fields
Shaking with fear, the Po and the Ticino
Lashing the city walls with iron waves,
Then may you know that Charlemagne is come.
And even as he spake, in the northwest,
Lo! there uprose a black and threatening cloud,
Out of whose bosom flashed the light of arms
Upon the people pent up in the city;
A light more terrible than any darkness;
And Charlemagne appeared;--a Man of Iron!

His helmet was of iron, and his gloves
Of iron, and his breastplate and his greaves
And tassets were of iron, and his shield.
In his left hand he held an iron spear,
In his right hand his sword invincible.
The horse he rode on had the strength of iron,
And color of iron.  All who went before him
Beside him and behind him, his whole host,
Were armed with iron, and their hearts within them
Were stronger than the armor that they wore.
The fields and all the roads were filled with iron,
And points of iron glistened in the sun
And shed a terror through the city streets.

This at a single glance Olger the Dane
Saw from the tower, and turning to the King
Exclaimed in haste: "Behold! this is the man
You looked for with such eagerness!" and then
Fell as one dead at Desiderio's feet.



INTERLUDE

Well pleased all listened to the tale,
That drew, the Student said, its pith
And marrow from the ancient myth
Of some one with an iron flail;
Or that portentous Man of Brass
Hephaestus made in days of yore,
Who stalked about the Cretan shore,
And saw the ships appear and pass,
And threw stones at the Argonauts,
Being filled with indiscriminate ire
That tangled and perplexed his thoughts;
But, like a hospitable host,
When strangers landed on the coast,
Heated himself red-hot with fire,
And hugged them in his arms, and pressed
Their bodies to his burning breast.

The Poet answered: "No, not thus
The legend rose; it sprang at first
Out of the hunger and the thirst
In all men for the marvellous.
And thus it filled and satisfied
The imagination of mankind,
And this ideal to the mind
Was truer than historic fact.
Fancy enlarged and multiplied
The tenors of the awful name
Of Charlemagne, till he became
Armipotent in every act,
And, clothed in mystery, appeared
Not what men saw, but what they feared.
Besides, unless my memory fail,
Your some one with an iron flail
Is not an ancient myth at all,
But comes much later on the scene
As Talus in the Faerie Queene,
The iron groom of Artegall,
Who threshed out falsehood and deceit,
And truth upheld, and righted wrong,
As was, as is the swallow, fleet,
And as the lion is, was strong."

The Theologian said: "Perchance
Your chronicler in writing this
Had in his mind the Anabasis,
Where Xenophon describes the advance
Of Artaxerxes to the fight;
At first the low gray cloud of dust,
And then a blackness o'er the fields
As of a passing thunder-gust,
Then flash of brazen armor bright,
And ranks of men, and spears up-thrust,
Bowmen and troops with wicker shields,
And cavalry equipped in white,
And chariots ranged in front of these
With scythes upon their axle-trees."

To this the Student answered: "Well,
I also have a tale to tell
Of Charlemagne; a tale that throws
A softer light, more tinged with rose,
Than your grim apparition cast
Upon the darkness of the past.
Listen, and hear in English rhyme
What the good Monk of Lauresheim
Gives as the gossip of his time,
In mediaeval Latin prose."



THE STUDENT'S TALE

EMMA AND EGINHARD

When Alcuin taught the sons of Charlemagne,
In the free schools of Aix, how kings should reign,
And with them taught the children of the poor
How subjects should be patient and endure,
He touched the lips of some, as best befit,
With honey from the hives of Holy Writ;
Others intoxicated with the wine
Of ancient history, sweet but less divine;
Some with the wholesome fruits of grammar fed;
Others with mysteries of the stars o'er-head,
That hang suspended in the vaulted sky
Like lamps in some fair palace vast and high.

In sooth, it was a pleasant sight to see
That Saxon monk, with hood and rosary,
With inkhorn at his belt, and pen and book,
And mingled lore and reverence in his look,
Or hear the cloister and the court repeat
The measured footfalls of his sandaled feet,
Or watch him with the pupils of his school,
Gentle of speech, but absolute of rule.

Among them, always earliest in his place.
Was Eginhard, a youth of Frankish race,
Whose face was bright with flashes that forerun
The splendors of a yet unrisen sun.
To him all things were possible, and seemed
Not what he had accomplished, but had dreamed,
And what were tasks to others were his play,
The pastime of an idle holiday.

Smaragdo, Abbot of St. Michael's, said,
With many a shrug and shaking of the head,
Surely some demon must possess the lad,
Who showed more wit than ever schoolboy had,
And learned his Trivium thus without the rod;
But Alcuin said it was the grace of God.

Thus he grew up, in Logic point-device,
Perfect in Grammar, and in Rhetoric nice;
Science of Numbers, Geometric art,
And lore of Stars, and Music knew by heart;
A Minnesinger, long before the times
Of those who sang their love in Suabian rhymes.

The Emperor, when he heard this good report
Of Eginhard much buzzed about the court,
Said to himself, "This stripling seems to be
Purposely sent into the world for me;
He shall become my scribe, and shall be schooled
In all the arts whereby the world is ruled."
Thus did the gentle Eginhard attain
To honor in the court of Charlemagne;
Became the sovereign's favorite, his right hand,
So that his fame was great in all the land,
And all men loved him for his modest grace
And comeliness of figure and of face.
An inmate of the palace, yet recluse,
A man of books, yet sacred from abuse
Among the armed knights with spur on heel,
The tramp of horses and the clang of steel;
And as the Emperor promised he was schooled
In all the arts by which the world is ruled.
But the one art supreme, whose law is fate,
The Emperor never dreamed of till too late.

Home from her convent to the palace came
The lovely Princess Emma, whose sweet name,
Whispered by seneschal or sung by bard,
Had often touched the soul of Eginhard.
He saw her from his window, as in state
She came, by knights attended through the gate;
He saw her at the banquet of that day,
Fresh as the morn, and beautiful as May;
He saw her in the garden, as she strayed
Among the flowers of summer with her maid,
And said to him, "O Eginhard, disclose
The meaning and the mystery of the rose";
And trembling he made answer: "In good sooth,
Its mystery is love, its meaning youth!"

How can I tell the signals and the signs
By which one heart another heart divines?
How can I tell the many thousand ways
By which it keeps the secret it betrays?

O mystery of love!  O strange romance!
Among the Peers and Paladins of France,
Shining in steel, and prancing on gay steeds,
Noble by birth, yet nobler by great deeds,
The Princess Emma had no words nor looks
But for this clerk, this man of thought and books.

The summer passed, the autumn came; the stalks
Of lilies blackened in the garden walks;
The leaves fell, russet-golden and blood-red,
Love-letters thought the poet fancy-led,
Or Jove descending in a shower of gold
Into the lap of Danae of old;
For poets cherish many a strange conceit,
And love transmutes all nature by its heat.

No more the garden lessons, nor the dark
And hurried meetings in the twilight park;
But now the studious lamp, and the delights
Of firesides in the silent winter nights,
And watching from his window hour by hour
The light that burned in Princess Emma's tower.

At length one night, while musing by the fire,
O'ercome at last by his insane desire,--
For what will reckless love not do and dare?--
He crossed the court, and climbed the winding stair,
With some feigned message in the Emperor's name;
But when he to the lady's presence came
He knelt down at her feet, until she laid
Her hand upon him, like a naked blade,
And whispered in his ear: "Arise, Sir Knight,
To my heart's level, O my heart's delight."

And there he lingered till the crowing cock,
The Alectryon of the farmyard and the flock,
Sang his aubade with lusty voice and clear,
To tell the sleeping world that dawn was near.
And then they parted; but at parting, lo!
They saw the palace courtyard white with snow,
And, placid as a nun, the moon on high
Gazing from cloudy cloisters of the sky.
"Alas!" he said, "how hide the fatal line
Of footprints leading from thy door to mine,
And none returning!"  Ah, he little knew
What woman's wit, when put to proof, can do!

That night the Emperor, sleepless with the cares
And troubles that attend on state affairs,
Had risen before the dawn, and musing gazed
Into the silent night, as one amazed
To see the calm that reigned o'er all supreme,
When his own reign was but a troubled dream.
The moon lit up the gables capped with snow,
And the white roofs, and half the court below,
And he beheld a form, that seemed to cower
Beneath a burden, come from Emma's tower,--
A woman, who upon her shoulders bore
Clerk Eginhard to his own private door,
And then returned in haste, but still essayed
To tread the footprints she herself had made;
And as she passed across the lighted space,
The Emperor saw his daughter Emma's face!

He started not; he did not speak or moan,
But seemed as one who hath been turned to stone;
And stood there like a statue, nor awoke
Out of his trance of pain, till morning broke,
Till the stars faded, and the moon went down,
And o'er the towers and steeples of the town
Came the gray daylight; then the sun, who took
The empire of the world with sovereign look,
Suffusing with a soft and golden glow
All the dead landscape in its shroud of snow,
Touching with flame the tapering chapel spires,
Windows and roofs, and smoke of household fires,
And kindling park and palace as he came;
The stork's nest on the chimney seemed in flame.
And thus he stood till Eginhard appeared,
Demure and modest with his comely beard
And flowing flaxen tresses, come to ask,
As was his wont, the day's appointed task.

The Emperor looked upon him with a smile,
And gently said: "My son, wait yet awhile;
This hour my council meets upon some great
And very urgent business of the state.
Come back within the hour.  On thy return
The work appointed for thee shalt thou learn.

Having dismissed this gallant Troubadour,
He summoned straight his council, and secure
And steadfast in his purpose, from the throne
All the adventure of the night made known;
Then asked for sentence; and with eager breath
Some answered banishment, and others death.

Then spake the king: "Your sentence is not mine;
Life is the gift of God, and is divine;
Nor from these palace walls shall one depart
Who carries such a secret in his heart;
My better judgment points another way.
Good Alcuin, I remember how one day
When my Pepino asked you, 'What are men?'
You wrote upon his tablets with your pen,
'Guests of the grave and travellers that pass!'
This being true of all men, we, alas!
Being all fashioned of the selfsame dust,
Let us be merciful as well as just;
This passing traveller, who hath stolen away
The brightest jewel of my crown to-day,
Shall of himself the precious gem restore;
By giving it, I make it mine once more.
Over those fatal footprints I will throw
My ermine mantle like another snow."

Then Eginhard was summoned to the hall,
And entered, and in presence of them all,
The Emperor said: "My son, for thou to me
Hast been a son, and evermore shalt be,
Long hast thou served thy sovereign, and thy zeal
Pleads to me with importunate appeal,
While I have been forgetful to requite
Thy service and affection as was right.
But now the hour is come, when I, thy Lord,
Will crown thy love with such supreme reward,
A gift so precious kings have striven in vain
To win it from the hands of Charlemagne."

Then sprang the portals of the chamber wide,
And Princess Emma entered, in the pride
Of birth and beauty, that in part o'er-came
The conscious terror and the blush of shame.
And the good Emperor rose up from his throne,
And taking her white hand within his own
Placed it in Eginhard's, and said: "My son
This is the gift thy constant zeal hath won;
Thus I repay the royal debt I owe,
And cover up the footprints in the snow."



INTERLUDE

Thus ran the Student's pleasant rhyme
Of Eginhard and love and youth;
Some doubted its historic truth,
But while they doubted, ne'ertheless
Saw in it gleams of truthfulness,
And thanked the Monk of Lauresheim.

This they discussed in various mood;
Then in the silence that ensued
Was heard a sharp and sudden sound
As of a bowstring snapped in air;
And the Musician with a bound
Sprang up in terror from his chair,
And for a moment listening stood,
Then strode across the room, and found
His dear, his darling violin
Still lying safe asleep within
Its little cradle, like a child
That gives a sudden cry of pain,
And wakes to fall asleep again;
And as he looked at it and smiled,
By the uncertain light beguiled,
Despair! two strings were broken in twain.

While all lamented and made moan,
With many a sympathetic word
As if the loss had been their own,
Deeming the tones they might have heard
Sweeter than they had heard before,
They saw the Landlord at the door,
The missing man, the portly Squire!
He had not entered, but he stood
With both arms full of seasoned wood,
To feed the much-devouring fire,
That like a lion in a cage
Lashed its long tail and roared with rage.

The missing man!  Ah, yes, they said,
Missing, but whither had he fled?
Where had he hidden himself away?
No farther than the barn or shed;
He had not hidden himself, nor fled;
How should he pass the rainy day
But in his barn with hens and hay,
Or mending harness, cart, or sled?
Now, having come, he needs must stay
And tell his tale as well as they.

The Landlord answered only: "These
Are logs from the dead apple-trees
Of the old orchard planted here
By the first Howe of Sudbury.
Nor oak nor maple has so clear
A flame, or burns so quietly,
Or leaves an ash so clean and white";
Thinking by this to put aside
The impending tale that terrified;
When suddenly, to his delight,
The Theologian interposed,
Saying that when the door was closed,
And they had stopped that draft of cold,
Unpleasant night air, he proposed
To tell a tale world-wide apart
From that the Student had just told;
World-wide apart, and yet akin,
As showing that the human heart
Beats on forever as of old,
As well beneath the snow-white fold
Of Quaker kerchief, as within
Sendal or silk or cloth of gold,
And without preface would begin.

And then the clamorous clock struck eight,
Deliberate, with sonorous chime
Slow measuring out the march of time,
Like some grave Consul of old Rome
In Jupiter's temple driving home
The nails that marked the year and date.
Thus interrupted in his rhyme,
The Theologian needs must wait;
But quoted Horace, where he sings
The dire Necessity of things,
That drives into the roofs sublime
Of new-built houses of the great
The adamantine nails of Fate.

When ceased the little carillon
To herald from its wooden tower
The important transit of the hour,
The Theologian hastened on,
Content to be all owed at last
To sing his Idyl of the Past.



THE THEOLOGIAN'S TALE

ELIZABETH

I

"Ah, how short are the days!  How soon the night overtakes us!
In the old country the twilight is longer; but here in the forest
Suddenly comes the dark, with hardly a pause in its coming,
Hardly a moment between the two lights, the day and the lamplight;
Yet how grand is the winter!  How spotless the snow is, and perfect!"

  Thus spake Elizabeth Haddon at nightfall to Hannah the housemaid,
As in the farm-house kitchen, that served for kitchen and parlor,
By the window she sat with her work, and looked on a landscape
White as the great white sheet that Peter saw in his vision,
By the four corners let down and descending out of the heavens.
Covered with snow were the forests of pine, and the fields and the meadows.
Nothing was dark but the sky, and the distant Delaware flowing
Down from its native hills, a peaceful and bountiful river.

  Then with a smile on her lips made answer Hannah the housemaid:
"Beautiful winter! yea, the winter is beautiful, surely,
If one could only walk like a fly with one's feet on the ceiling.
But the great Delaware River is not like the Thames, as we saw it
Out of our upper windows in Rotherhithe Street in the Borough,
Crowded with masts and sails of vessels coming and going;
Here there is nothing but pines, with patches of snow on their branches.
There is snow in the air, and see! it is falling already;
All the roads will be blocked, and I pity Joseph to-morrow,
Breaking his way through the drifts, with his sled and oxen; and then, too,
How in all the world shall we get to Meeting on First-Day?"

  But Elizabeth checked her, and answered, mildly reproving:
"Surely the Lord will provide; for unto the snow he sayeth,
Be thou on the earth, the good Lord sayeth; he is it
Giveth snow like wool, like ashes scatters the hoar-frost."
So she folded her work and laid it away in her basket.

  Meanwhile Hannah the housemaid had closed and fastened the shutters,
Spread the cloth, and lighted the lamp on the table, and placed there
Plates and cups from the dresser, the brown rye loaf, and the butter
Fresh from the dairy, and then, protecting her hand with a holder,
Took from the crane in the chimney the steaming and simmering kettle,
Poised it aloft in the air, and filled up the earthen teapot,
Made in Delft, and adorned with quaint and wonderful figures.

  Then Elizabeth said, "Lo! Joseph is long on his errand.
I have sent him away with a hamper of food and of clothing
For the poor in the village.  A good lad and cheerful is Joseph;
In the right place is his heart, and his hand is ready and willing."

  Thus in praise of her servant she spake, and Hannah the housemaid
Laughed with her eyes, as she listened, but governed her tongue, and was silent,
While her mistress went on: "The house is far from the village;
We should be lonely here, were it not for Friends that in passing
Sometimes tarry o'ernight, and make us glad by their coming."

  Thereupon answered Hannah the housemaid, the thrifty, the frugal:
"Yea, they come and they tarry, as if thy house were a tavern;
Open to all are its doors, and they come and go like the pigeons
In and out of the holes of the pigeon-house over the hayloft,
Cooing and smoothing their feathers and basking themselves in the sunshine."

  But in meekness of spirit, and calmly, Elizabeth answered:
"All I have is the Lord's, not mine to give or withhold it;
I but distribute his gifts to the poor, and to those of his people
Who in journeyings often surrender their lives to his service.
His, not mine, are the gifts, and only so far can I make them
Mine, as in giving I add my heart to whatever is given.
Therefore my excellent father first built this house in the clearing;
Though he came not himself, I came; for the Lord was my guidance,
Leading me here for this service.  We must not grudge, then, to others
Ever the cup of cold water, or crumbs that fall from our table."

  Thus rebuked, for a season was silent the penitent housemaid;
And Elizabeth said in tones even sweeter and softer:
"Dost thou remember, Hannah, the great May-Meeting in London,
When I was still a child, how we sat in the silent assembly,
Waiting upon the Lord in patient and passive submission?
No one spake, till at length a young man, a stranger, John Estaugh,
Moved by the Spirit, rose, as if he were John the Apostle,
Speaking such words of power that they bowed our hearts, as a strong wind
Bends the grass of the fields, or grain that is ripe for the sickle.
Thoughts of him to-day have been oft borne inward upon me,
Wherefore I do not know; but strong is the feeling within me
That once more I shall see a face I have never forgotten."


II

E'en as she spake they heard the musical jangle of sleigh-bells,
First far off, with a dreamy sound and faint in the distance,
Then growing nearer and louder, and turning into the farmyard,
Till it stopped at the door, with sudden creaking of runners.
Then there were voices heard as of two men talking together,
And to herself, as she listened, upbraiding said Hannah the housemaid,
"It is Joseph come back, and I wonder what stranger is with him?"

  Down from its nail she took and lighted the great tin lantern
Pierced with holes, and round, and roofed like the top of a lighthouse,
And went forth to receive the coming guest at the doorway,
Casting into the dark a network of glimmer and shadow
Over the falling snow, the yellow sleigh, and the horses,
And the forms of men, snow-covered, looming gigantic.
Then giving Joseph the lantern, she entered the house with the stranger.
Youthful he was and tall, and his cheeks aglow with the night air;
And as he entered, Elizabeth rose, and, going to meet him,
As if an unseen power had announced and preceded his presence,
And he had come as one whose coming had long been expected,
Quietly gave him her hand, and said, "Thou art welcome, John Estaugh."
And the stranger replied, with staid and quiet behavior,
"Dost thou remember me still, Elizabeth?  After so many
Years have passed, it seemeth a wonderful thing that I find thee.
Surely the hand of the Lord conducted me here to thy threshold.
For as I journeyed along, and pondered alone and in silence
On his ways, that are past finding out, I saw in the snow-mist,
Seemingly weary with travel, a wayfarer, who by the wayside
Paused and waited.  Forthwith I remembered Queen Candace's eunuch,
How on the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto Gaza,
Reading Esaias the Prophet, he journeyed, and spake unto Philip,
Praying him to come up and sit in his chariot with him.
So I greeted the man, and he mounted the sledge beside me,
And as we talked on the way he told me of thee and thy homestead,
How, being led by the light of the Spirit, that never deceiveth,
Full of zeal for the work of the Lord, thou hadst come to this country.
And I remembered thy name, and thy father and mother in England,
And on my journey have stopped to see thee, Elizabeth Haddon.
Wishing to strengthen thy hand in the labors of love thou art doing."

  And Elizabeth answered with confident voice, and serenely
Looking into his face with her innocent eyes as she answered,
"Surely the hand of the Lord is in it; his Spirit hath led thee
Out of the darkness and storm to the light and peace of my fireside."

  Then, with stamping of feet, the door was opened, and Joseph
Entered, bearing the lantern, and, carefully blowing the light out,
Rung it up on its nail, and all sat down to their supper;
For underneath that roof was no distinction of persons,
But one family only, one heart, one hearth and one household.

  When the supper was ended they drew their chairs to the fireplace,
Spacious, open-hearted, profuse of flame and of firewood,
Lord of forests unfelled, and not a gleaner of fagots,
Spreading its arms to embrace with inexhaustible bounty
All who fled from the cold, exultant, laughing at winter!
Only Hannah the housemaid was busy in clearing the table,
Coming and going, and hustling about in closet and chamber.

  Then Elizabeth told her story again to John Estaugh,
Going far back to the past, to the early days of her childhood;
How she had waited and watched, in all her doubts and besetments
Comforted with the extendings and holy, sweet inflowings
Of the spirit of love, till the voice imperative sounded,
And she obeyed the voice, and cast in her lot with her people
Here in the desert land, and God would provide for the issue.

  Meanwhile Joseph sat with folded hands, and demurely
Listened, or seemed to listen, and in the silence that followed
Nothing was heard for a while but the step of Hannah the housemaid
Walking the floor overhead, and setting the chambers in order.
And Elizabeth said, with a smile of compassion, "The maiden
Hath a light heart in her breast, but her feet are heavy and awkward."
Inwardly Joseph laughed, but governed his tongue, and was silent.

  Then came the hour of sleep, death's counterfeit, nightly rehearsal
Of the great Silent Assembly, the Meeting of shadows, where no man
Speaketh, but all are still, and the peace and rest are unbroken!
Silently over that house the blessing of slumber descended.
But when the morning dawned, and the sun uprose in his splendor,
Breaking his way through clouds that encumbered his path in the heavens,
Joseph was seen with his sled and oxen breaking a pathway
Through the drifts of snow; the horses already were harnessed,
And John Estaugh was standing and taking leave at the threshold,
Saying that he should return at the Meeting in May; while above them
Hannah the housemaid, the homely, was looking out of the attic,
Laughing aloud at Joseph, then suddenly closing the casement,
As the bird in a cuckoo-clock peeps out of its window,
Then disappears again, and closes the shutter behind it.



III

Now was the winter gone, and the snow; and Robin the Redbreast,
Boasted on bush and tree it was he, it was he and no other
That had covered with leaves the Babes in the Wood, and blithely
All the birds sang with him, and little cared for his boasting,
Or for his Babes in the Wood, or the Cruel Uncle, and only
Sang for the mates they had chosen, and cared for the nests they were building.
With them, but more sedately and meekly, Elizabeth Haddon
Sang in her inmost heart, but her lips were silent and songless.
Thus came the lovely spring with a rush of blossoms and music,
Flooding the earth with flowers, and the air with melodies vernal.

  Then it came to pass, one pleasant morning, that slowly
Up the road there came a cavalcade, as of pilgrims
Men and women, wending their way to the Quarterly Meeting
In the neighboring town; and with them came riding John Estaugh.
At Elizabeth's door they stopped to rest, and alighting
Tasted the currant wine, and the bread of rye, and the honey
Brought from the hives, that stood by the sunny wall of the garden;
Then remounted their horses, refreshed, and continued their journey,
And Elizabeth with them, and Joseph, and Hannah the housemaid.
But, as they started, Elizabeth lingered a little, and leaning
Over her horse's neck, in a whisper said to John Estaugh
"Tarry awhile behind, for I have something to tell thee,
Not to be spoken lightly, nor in the presence of others;
Them it concerneth not, only thee and me it concerneth."
And they rode slowly along through the woods, conversing together.
It was a pleasure to breathe the fragrant air of the forest;
It was a pleasure to live on that bright and happy May morning!

  Then Elizabeth said, though still with a certain reluctance,
As if impelled to reveal a secret she fain would have guarded:
"I will no longer conceal what is laid upon me to tell thee;
I have received from the Lord a charge to love thee, John Estaugh."

  And John Estaugh made answer, surprised by the words she had spoken,
"Pleasant to me are thy converse, thy ways, thy meekness of spirit;
Pleasant thy frankness of speech, and thy soul's immaculate whiteness,
Love without dissimulation, a holy and inward adorning.
But I have yet no light to lead me, no voice to direct me.
When the Lord's work is done, and the toil and the labor completed
He hath appointed to me, I will gather into the stillness
Of my own heart awhile, and listen and wait for his guidance."

  Then Elizabeth said, not troubled nor wounded in spirit,
"So is it best, John Estaugh.  We will not speak of it further.
It hath been laid upon me to tell thee this, for to-morrow
Thou art going away, across the sea, and I know not
When I shall see thee more; but if the Lord hath decreed it,
Thou wilt return again to seek me here and to find me."
And they rode onward in silence, and entered the town with the others.



IV

Ships that pass in the night, and speak each other in passing,
Only a signal shown and a distant voice in the darkness;
So on the ocean of life we pass and speak one another,
Only a look and a voice, then darkness again and a silence.

  Now went on as of old the quiet life of the homestead.
Patient and unrepining Elizabeth labored, in all things
Mindful not of herself, but bearing the burdens of others,
Always thoughtful and kind and untroubled; and Hannah the housemaid
Diligent early and late, and rosy with washing and scouring,
Still as of old disparaged the eminent merits of Joseph,
And was at times reproved for her light and frothy behavior,
For her shy looks, and her careless words, and her evil surmisings,
Being pressed down somewhat like a cart with sheaves overladen,
As she would sometimes say to Joseph, quoting the Scriptures.

  Meanwhile John Estaugh departed across the sea, and departing
Carried hid in his heart a secret sacred and precious,
Filling its chambers with fragrance, and seeming to him in its sweetness
Mary's ointment of spikenard, that filled all the house with its odor.
O lost days of delight, that are wasted in doubting and waiting!
O lost hours and days in which we might have been happy!
But the light shone at last, and guided his wavering footsteps,
And at last came the voice, imperative, questionless, certain.

  Then John Estaugh came back o'er the sea for the gift that was offered,
Better than houses and lands, the gift of a woman's affection.
And on the First-Day that followed, he rose in the Silent Assembly,
Holding in his strong hand a hand that trembled a little,
Promising to be kind and true and faithful in all things.
Such were the marriage-rites of John and Elizabeth Estaugh.

  And not otherwise Joseph, the honest, the diligent servant,
Sped in his bashful wooing with homely Hannah the housemaid;
For when he asked her the question, she answered, "Nay"; and then added
"But thee may make believe, and see what will come of it, Joseph."



INTERLUDE

"A pleasant and a winsome tale,"
The Student said, "though somewhat pale
And quiet in its coloring,
As if it caught its tone and air
From the gray suits that Quakers wear;
Yet worthy of some German bard,
Hebel, or Voss, or Eberhard,
Who love of humble themes to sing,
In humble verse; but no more true
Than was the tale I told to you."

The Theologian made reply,
And with some warmth, "That I deny;
'T is no invention of my own,
But something well and widely known
To readers of a riper age,
Writ by the skilful hand that wrote
The Indian tale of Hobomok,
And Philothea's classic page.
I found it like a waif afloat
Or dulse uprooted from its rock,
On the swift tides that ebb and flow
In daily papers, and at flood
Bear freighted vessels to and fro,
But later, when the ebb is low,
Leave a long waste of sand and mud."

"It matters little," quoth the Jew;
"The cloak of truth is lined with lies,
Sayeth some proverb old and wise;
And Love is master of all arts,
And puts it into human hearts
The strangest things to say and do."

And here the controversy closed
Abruptly, ere 't was well begun;
For the Sicilian interposed
With, "Lordlings, listen, every one
That listen may, unto a tale
That's merrier than the nightingale;
A tale that cannot boast, forsooth,
A single rag or shred of truth;
That does not leave the mind in doubt
As to the with it or without;
A naked falsehood and absurd
As mortal ever told or heard.
Therefore I tell it; or, maybe,
Simply because it pleases me."



THE SICILIAN'S TALE

THE MONK OF CASAL-MAGGIORE

Once on a time, some centuries ago,
  In the hot sunshine two Franciscan friars
Wended their weary way with footsteps slow
  Back to their convent, whose white walls and spires
Gleamed on the hillside like a patch of snow;
  Covered with dust they were, and torn by briers,
And bore like sumpter-mules upon their backs
The badge of poverty, their beggar's sacks.

The first was Brother Anthony, a spare
  And silent man, with pallid cheeks and thin,
Much given to vigils, penance, fasting, prayer,
  Solemn and gray, and worn with discipline,
As if his body but white ashes were,
  Heaped on the living coals that glowed within;
A simple monk, like many of his day,
Whose instinct was to listen and obey.

A different man was Brother Timothy,
  Of larger mould and of a coarser paste;
A rubicund and stalwart monk was he,
  Broad in the shoulders, broader in the waist,
Who often filled the dull refectory
  With noise by which the convent was disgraced,
But to the mass-book gave but little heed,
By reason he had never learned to read.

Now, as they passed the outskirts of a wood,
  They saw, with mingled pleasure and surprise,
Fast tethered to a tree an ass, that stood
  Lazily winking his large, limpid eyes.
The farmer Gilbert of that neighborhood
  His owner was, who, looking for supplies
Of fagots, deeper in the wood had strayed,
Leaving his beast to ponder in the shade.

As soon as Brother Timothy espied
  The patient animal, he said: "Good-lack!
Thus for our needs doth Providence provide;
  We'll lay our wallets on the creature's back."
This being done, he leisurely untied
  From head and neck the halter of the jack,
And put it round his own, and to the tree
Stood tethered fast as if the ass were he.

And, bursting forth into a merry laugh,
  He cried to Brother Anthony: "Away!
And drive the ass before you with your staff;
  And when you reach the convent you may say
You left me at a farm, half tired and half
  Ill with a fever, for a night and day,
And that the farmer lent this ass to bear
Our wallets, that are heavy with good fare."

Now Brother Anthony, who knew the pranks
  Of Brother Timothy, would not persuade
Or reason with him on his quirks and cranks,
  But, being obedient, silently obeyed;
And, smiting with his staff the ass's flanks,
  Drove him before him over hill and glade,
Safe with his provend to the convent gate,
Leaving poor Brother Timothy to his fate.

Then Gilbert, laden with fagots for his fire,
  Forth issued from the wood, and stood aghast
To see the ponderous body of the friar
  Standing where he had left his donkey last.
Trembling he stood, and dared not venture nigher,
  But stared, and gaped, and crossed himself full fast;
For, being credulous and of little wit,
He thought it was some demon from the pit.

While speechless and bewildered thus he gazed,
  And dropped his load of fagots on the ground,
Quoth Brother Timothy: "Be not amazed
  That where you left a donkey should be found
A poor Franciscan friar, half-starved and crazed,
  Standing demure and with a halter bound;
But set me free, and hear the piteous story
Of Brother Timothy of Casal-Maggiore.

"I am a sinful man, although you see
  I wear the consecrated cowl and cape;
You never owned an ass, but you owned me,
  Changed and transformed from my own natural shape
All for the deadly sin of gluttony,
  From which I could not otherwise escape,
Than by this penance, dieting on grass,
And being worked and beaten as an ass.

"Think of the ignominy I endured;
  Think of the miserable life I led,
The toil and blows to which I was inured,
  My wretched lodging in a windy shed,
My scanty fare so grudgingly procured,
  The damp and musty straw that formed my bed!
But, having done this penance for my sins,
My life as man and monk again begins."

The simple Gilbert, hearing words like these,
  Was conscience-stricken, and fell down apace
Before the friar upon his bended knees,
  And with a suppliant voice implored his grace;
And the good monk, now very much at ease,
  Granted him pardon with a smiling face,
Nor could refuse to be that night his guest,
It being late, and he in need of rest.

Upon a hillside, where the olive thrives,
  With figures painted on its white-washed walls,
The cottage stood; and near the humming hives
  Made murmurs as of far-off waterfalls;
A place where those who love secluded lives
  Might live content, and, free from noise and brawls,
Like Claudian's Old Man of Verona here
Measure by fruits the slow-revolving year.

And, coming to this cottage of content
  They found his children, and the buxom wench
His wife, Dame Cicely, and his father, bent
  With years and labor, seated on a bench,
Repeating over some obscure event
  In the old wars of Milanese and French;
All welcomed the Franciscan, with a sense
Of sacred awe and humble reverence.

When Gilbert told them what had come to pass,
  How beyond question, cavil, or surmise,
Good Brother Timothy had been their ass,
  You should have seen the wonder in their eyes;
You should have heard them cry, "Alas! alas!
  Have heard their lamentations and their sighs!
For all believed the story, and began
To see a saint in this afflicted man.

Forthwith there was prepared a grand repast,
  To satisfy the craving of the friar
After so rigid and prolonged a fast;
  The bustling housewife stirred the kitchen fire;
Then her two barnyard fowls, her best and last,
  Were put to death, at her express desire,
And served up with a salad in a bowl,
And flasks of country wine to crown the whole.

It would not be believed should I repeat
  How hungry Brother Timothy appeared;
It was a pleasure but to see him eat,
  His white teeth flashing through his russet beard,
His face aglow and flushed with wine and meat,
  His roguish eyes that rolled and laughed and leered!
Lord! how he drank the blood-red country wine
As if the village vintage were divine!

And all the while he talked without surcease,
  And told his merry tales with jovial glee
That never flagged, but rather did increase,
  And laughed aloud as if insane were he,
And wagged his red beard, matted like a fleece,
  And cast such glances at Dame Cicely
That Gilbert now grew angry with his guest,
And thus in words his rising wrath expressed.

"Good father," said he, "easily we see
  How needful in some persons, and how right,
Mortification of the flesh may be.
  The indulgence you have given it to-night,
After long penance, clearly proves to me
  Your strength against temptation is but slight,
And shows the dreadful peril you are in
Of a relapse into your deadly sin.

"To-morrow morning, with the rising sun,
  Go back unto your convent, nor refrain
From fasting and from scourging, for you run
  Great danger to become an ass again,
Since monkish flesh and asinine are one;
  Therefore be wise, nor longer here remain,
Unless you wish the scourge should be applied
By other hands, that will not spare your hide."

When this the monk had heard, his color fled
  And then returned, like lightning in the air,
Till he was all one blush from foot to head,
  And even the bald spot in his russet hair
Turned from its usual pallor to bright red!
  The old man was asleep upon his chair.
Then all retired, and sank into the deep
And helpless imbecility of sleep.

They slept until the dawn of day drew near,
  Till the cock should have crowed, but did not crow,
For they had slain the shining chanticleer
  And eaten him for supper, as you know.
The monk was up betimes and of good cheer,
  And, having breakfasted, made haste to go,
As if he heard the distant matin bell,
And had but little time to say farewell.

Fresh was the morning as the breath of kine;
  Odors of herbs commingled with the sweet
Balsamic exhalations of the pine;
  A haze was in the air presaging heat;
Uprose the sun above the Apennine,
  And all the misty valleys at its feet
Were full of the delirious song of birds,
Voices of men, and bells, and low of herds.

All this to Brother Timothy was naught;
  He did not care for scenery, nor here
His busy fancy found the thing it sought;
  But when he saw the convent walls appear,
And smoke from kitchen chimneys upward caught
  And whirled aloft into the atmosphere,
He quickened his slow footsteps, like a beast
That scents the stable a league off at least.

And as he entered though the convent gate
  He saw there in the court the ass, who stood
Twirling his ears about, and seemed to wait,
  Just as he found him waiting in the wood;
And told the Prior that, to alleviate
  The daily labors of the brotherhood,
The owner, being a man of means and thrift,
Bestowed him on the convent as a gift.

And thereupon the Prior for many days
  Revolved this serious matter in his mind,
And turned it over many different ways,
  Hoping that some safe issue he might find;
But stood in fear of what the world would say,
  If he accepted presents of this kind,
Employing beasts of burden for the packs,
That lazy monks should carry on their backs.

Then, to avoid all scandal of the sort,
  And stop the mouth of cavil, he decreed
That he would cut the tedious matter short,
  And sell the ass with all convenient speed,
Thus saving the expense of his support,
  And hoarding something for a time of need.
So he despatched him to the neighboring Fair,
And freed himself from cumber and from care.

It happened now by chance, as some might say,
  Others perhaps would call it destiny,
Gilbert was at the Fair; and heard a bray,
  And nearer came, and saw that it was he,
And whispered in his ear, "Ah, lackaday!
  Good father, the rebellious flesh, I see,
Has changed you back into an ass again,
And all my admonitions were in vain."

The ass, who felt this breathing in his ear,
  Did not turn round to look, but shook his head,
As if he were not pleased these words to hear,
  And contradicted all that had been said.
And this made Gilbert cry in voice more clear,
  "I know you well; your hair is russet-red;
Do not deny it; for you are the same
Franciscan friar, and Timothy by name."

The ass, though now the secret had come out,
  Was obstinate, and shook his head again;
Until a crowd was gathered round about
  To hear this dialogue between the twain;
And raised their voices in a noisy shout
  When Gilbert tried to make the matter plain,
And flouted him and mocked him all day long
With laughter and with jibes and scraps of song.

"If this be Brother Timothy," they cried,
  "Buy him, and feed him on the tenderest grass;
Thou canst not do too much for one so tried
  As to be twice transformed into an ass."
So simple Gilbert bought him, and untied
  His halter, and o'er mountain and morass
He led him homeward, talking as he went
Of good behavior and a mind content.

The children saw them coming, and advanced,
  Shouting with joy, and hung about his neck,--
Not Gilbert's, but the ass's,--round him danced,
  And wove green garlands where-withal to deck
His sacred person; for again it chanced
  Their childish feelings, without rein or check,
Could not discriminate in any way
A donkey from a friar of Orders Gray.

"O Brother Timothy," the children said,
  "You have come back to us just as before;
We were afraid, and thought that you were dead,
  And we should never see you any more."
And then they kissed the white star on his head,
  That like a birth-mark or a badge he wore,
And patted him upon the neck and face,
And said a thousand things with childish grace.

Thenceforward and forever he was known
  As Brother Timothy, and led alway
A life of luxury, till he had grown
  Ungrateful being stuffed with corn and hay,
And very vicious.  Then in angry tone,
  Rousing himself, poor Gilbert said one day
"When simple kindness is misunderstood
A little flagellation may do good."

His many vices need not here be told;
  Among them was a habit that he had
Of flinging up his heels at young and old,
  Breaking his halter, running off like mad
O'er pasture-lands and meadow, wood and wold,
  And other misdemeanors quite as bad;
But worst of all was breaking from his shed
At night, and ravaging the cabbage-bed.

So Brother Timothy went back once more
  To his old life of labor and distress;
Was beaten worse than he had been before.
  And now, instead of comfort and caress,
Came labors manifold and trials sore;
  And as his toils increased his food grew less,
Until at last the great consoler, Death,
Ended his many sufferings with his breath.

Great was the lamentation when he died;
  And mainly that he died impenitent;
Dame Cicely bewailed, the children cried,
  The old man still remembered the event
In the French war, and Gilbert magnified
  His many virtues, as he came and went,
And said: "Heaven pardon Brother Timothy,
And keep us from the sin of gluttony."



INTERLUDE

"Signor Luigi," said the Jew,
When the Sicilian's tale was told,
"The were-wolf is a legend old,
But the were-ass is something new,
And yet for one I think it true.
The days of wonder have not ceased
If there are beasts in forms of men,
As sure it happens now and then,
Why may not man become a beast,
In way of punishment at least?

"But this I will not now discuss,
I leave the theme, that we may thus
Remain within the realm of song.
The story that I told before,
Though not acceptable to all,
At least you did not find too long.
I beg you, let me try again,
With something in a different vein,
Before you bid the curtain fall.
Meanwhile keep watch upon the door,
Nor let the Landlord leave his chair,
Lest he should vanish into air,
And thus elude our search once more."

Thus saying, from his lips he blew
A little cloud of perfumed breath,
And then, as if it were a clew
To lead his footsteps safely through,
Began his tale as followeth.



THE SPANISH JEW'S SECOND TALE

SCANDERBEG

The battle is fought and won
By King Ladislaus the Hun,
In fire of hell and death's frost,
On the day of Pentecost.
And in rout before his path
From the field of battle red
Flee all that are not dead
Of the army of Amurath.

In the darkness of the night
Iskander, the pride and boast
Of that mighty Othman host,
With his routed Turks, takes flight
From the battle fought and lost
On the day of Pentecost;
Leaving behind him dead
The army of Amurath,
The vanguard as it led,
The rearguard as it fled,
Mown down in the bloody swath
Of the battle's aftermath.

But he cared not for Hospodars,
Nor for Baron or Voivode,
As on through the night he rode
And gazed at the fateful stars,
That were shining overhead
But smote his steed with his staff,
And smiled to himself, and said;
"This is the time to laugh."

In the middle of the night,
In a halt of the hurrying flight,
There came a Scribe of the King
Wearing his signet ring,
And said in a voice severe:
"This is the first dark blot
On thy name, George Castriot!
Alas why art thou here,
And the army of Amurath slain,
And left on the battle plain?"

And Iskander answered and said:
"They lie on the bloody sod
By the hoofs of horses trod;
But this was the decree
Of the watchers overhead;
For the war belongeth to God,
And in battle who are we,
Who are we, that shall withstand
The wind of his lifted hand?"

Then he bade them bind with chains
This man of books and brains;
And the Scribe said: "What misdeed
Have I done, that, without need,
Thou doest to me this thing?"
And Iskander answering
Said unto him: "Not one
Misdeed to me hast thou done;
But for fear that thou shouldst run
And hide thyself from me,
Have I done this unto thee.

"Now write me a writing, O Scribe,
And a blessing be on thy tribe!
A writing sealed with thy ring,
To King Amurath's Pasha
In the city of Croia,
The city moated and walled,
That he surrender the same
In the name of my master, the King;
For what is writ in his name
Can never be recalled."

And the Scribe bowed low in dread,
And unto Iskander said:
"Allah is great and just,
But we are as ashes and dust;
How shall I do this thing,
When I know that my guilty head
Will be forfeit to the King?"

Then swift as a shooting star
The curved and shining blade
Of Iskander's scimetar
From its sheath, with jewels bright,
Shot, as he thundered: "Write!"
And the trembling Scribe obeyed,
And wrote in the fitful glare
Of the bivouac fire apart,
With the chill of the midnight air
On his forehead white and bare,
And the chill of death in his heart.

Then again Iskander cried:
"Now follow whither I ride,
For here thou must not stay.
Thou shalt be as my dearest friend,
And honors without end
Shall surround thee on every side,
And attend thee night and day."
But the sullen Scribe replied
"Our pathways here divide;
Mine leadeth not thy way."

And even as he spoke
Fell a sudden scimetar-stroke,
When no one else was near;
And the Scribe sank to the ground,
As a stone, pushed from the brink
Of a black pool, might sink
With a sob and disappear;
And no one saw the deed;
And in the stillness around
No sound was heard but the sound
Of the hoofs of Iskander's steed,
As forward he sprang with a bound.

Then onward he rode and afar,
With scarce three hundred men,
Through river and forest and fen,
O'er the mountains of Argentar;
And his heart was merry within,
When he crossed the river Drin,
And saw in the gleam of the morn
The White Castle Ak-Hissar,
The city Croia called,
The city moated and walled,
The city where he was born,--
And above it the morning star.

Then his trumpeters in the van
On their silver bugles blew,
And in crowds about him ran
Albanian and Turkoman,
That the sound together drew.
And he feasted with his friends,
And when they were warm with wine,
He said: "O friends of mine,
Behold what fortune sends,
And what the fates design!
King Amurath commands
That my father's wide domain,
This city and all its lands,
Shall be given to me again."

Then to the Castle White
He rode in regal state,
And entered in at the gate
In all his arms bedight,
And gave to the Pasha
Who ruled in Croia
The writing of the King,
Sealed with his signet ring.
And the Pasha bowed his head,
And after a silence said:
"Allah is just and great!
I yield to the will divine,
The city and lands are thine;
Who shall contend with fate?"

Anon from the castle walls
The crescent banner falls,
And the crowd beholds instead,
Like a portent in the sky,
Iskander's banner fly,
The Black Eagle with double head;
And a shout ascends on high,
For men's souls are tired of the Turks,
And their wicked ways and works,
That have made of Ak-Hissar
A city of the plague;
And the loud, exultant cry
That echoes wide and far
Is: "Long live Scanderbeg!"

It was thus Iskander came
Once more unto his own;
And the tidings, like the flame
Of a conflagration blown
By the winds of summer, ran,
Till the land was in a blaze,
And the cities far and near,
Sayeth Ben Joshua Ben Meir,
In his Book of the Words of the Days,
"Were taken as a man
Would take the tip of his ear."



INTERLUDE

"Now that is after my own heart,"
The Poet cried; "one understands
Your swarthy hero Scanderbeg,
Gauntlet on hand and boot on leg,
And skilled in every warlike art,
Riding through his Albanian lands,
And following the auspicious star
That shone for him o'er Ak-Hissar."

The Theologian added here
His word of praise not less sincere,
Although he ended with a jibe;
"The hero of romance and song
Was born," he said, "to right the wrong;
And I approve; but all the same
That bit of treason with the Scribe
Adds nothing to your hero's fame."

The Student praised the good old times
And liked the canter of the rhymes,
That had a hoofbeat in their sound;
But longed some further word to hear
Of the old chronicler Ben Meir,
And where his volume might he found.
The tall Musician walked the room
With folded arms and gleaming eyes,
As if he saw the Vikings rise,
Gigantic shadows in the gloom;
And much he talked of their emprise,
And meteors seen in Northern skies,
And Heimdal's horn, and day of doom
But the Sicilian laughed again;
"This is the time to laugh," he said,
For the whole story he well knew
Was an invention of the Jew,
Spun from the cobwebs in his brain,
And of the same bright scarlet thread
As was the Tale of Kambalu.

Only the Landlord spake no word;
'T was doubtful whether he had heard
The tale at all, so full of care
Was he of his impending fate,
That, like the sword of Damocles,
Above his head hung blank and bare,
Suspended by a single hair,
So that he could not sit at ease,
But sighed and looked disconsolate,
And shifted restless in his chair,
Revolving how he might evade
The blow of the descending blade.

The Student came to his relief
By saying in his easy way
To the Musician: "Calm your grief,
My fair Apollo of the North,
Balder the Beautiful and so forth;
Although your magic lyre or lute
With broken strings is lying mute,
Still you can tell some doleful tale
Of shipwreck in a midnight gale,
Or something of the kind to suit
The mood that we are in to-night
For what is marvellous and strange;
So give your nimble fancy range,
And we will follow in its flight."

But the Musician shook his head;
"No tale I tell to-night," he said,
"While my poor instrument lies there,
Even as a child with vacant stare
Lies in its little coffin dead."

Yet, being urged, he said at last:
"There comes to me out of the Past
A voice, whose tones are sweet and wild,
Singing a song almost divine,
And with a tear in every line;
An ancient ballad, that my nurse
Sang to me when I was a child,
In accents tender as the verse;
And sometimes wept, and sometimes smiled
While singing it, to see arise
The look of wonder in my eyes,
And feel my heart with tenor beat.
This simple ballad I retain
Clearly imprinted on my brain,
And as a tale will now repeat"



THE MUSICIAN'S TALE

THE MOTHER'S GHOST

Svend Dyring he rideth adown the glade;
     I myself was young!
There he hath wooed him so winsome a maid;
     Fair words gladden so many a heart.

Together were they for seven years,
And together children six were theirs.

Then came Death abroad through the land,
And blighted the beautiful lily-wand.

Svend Dyring he rideth adown the glade,
And again hath he wooed him another maid,

He hath wooed him a maid and brought home a bride,
But she was bitter and full of pride.

When she came driving into the yard,
There stood the six children weeping so hard.

There stood the small children with sorrowful heart;
From before her feet she thrust them apart.

She gave to them neither ale nor bread;
"Ye shall suffer hunger and hate," she said.

She took from them their quilts of blue,
And said: "Ye shall lie on the straw we strew."

She took from them the great waxlight;
"Now ye shall lie in the dark at night."

In the evening late they cried with cold;
The mother heard it under the mould.

The woman heard it the earth below:
"To my little children I must go."

She standeth before the Lord of all:
"And may I go to my children small?"

She prayed him so long, and would not cease,
Until he bade her depart in peace.

"At cock-crow thou shalt return again;
Longer thou shalt not there remain!"

She girded up her sorrowful bones,
And rifted the walls and the marble stones.

As through the village she flitted by,
The watch-dogs howled aloud to the sky.

When she came to the castle gate,
There stood her eldest daughter in wait.

"Why standest thou here, dear daughter mine?
How fares it with brothers and sisters thine?"

"Never art thou mother of mine,
For my mother was both fair and fine.

"My mother was white, with cheeks of red,
But thou art pale, and like to the dead."

"How should I be fair and fine?
I have been dead; pale cheeks are mine.

"How should I be white and red,
So long, so long have I been dead?"

When she came in at the chamber door,
There stood the small children weeping sore.

One she braided, another she brushed,
The third she lifted, the fourth she hushed.

The fifth she took on her lap and pressed,
As if she would suckle it at her breast.

Then to her eldest daughter said she,
"Do thou bid Svend Dyring come hither to me."

Into the chamber when he came
She spake to him in anger and shame.

"I left behind me both ale and bread;
My children hunger and are not fed.

"I left behind me quilts of blue;
My children lie on the straw ye strew.

"I left behind me the great waxlight;
My children lie in the dark at night.

"If I come again unto your hall,
As cruel a fate shall you befall!

"Now crows the cock with feathers red;
Back to the earth must all the dead.

"Now crows the cock with feathers swart;
The gates of heaven fly wide apart.

"Now crows the cock with feathers white;
I can abide no longer to-night."

Whenever they heard the watch-dogs wail,
They gave the children bread and ale.

Whenever they heard the watch-dogs bay,
They feared lest the dead were on their way.

Whenever they heard the watch-dogs bark;
     I myself was young!
They feared the dead out there in the dark.
     Fair words gladden so many a heart.



INTERLUDE

Touched by the pathos of these rhymes,
The Theologian said: "All praise
Be to the ballads of old times
And to the bards of simple ways,
Who walked with Nature hand in hand,
Whose country was their Holy Land,
Whose singing robes were homespun brown
From looms of their own native town,
Which they were not ashamed to wear,
And not of silk or sendal gay,
Nor decked with fanciful array
Of cockle-shells from Outre-Mer."

To whom the Student answered: "Yes;
All praise and honor!  I confess
That bread and ale, home-baked, home-brewed,
Are wholesome and nutritious food,
But not enough for all our needs;
Poets--the best of them--are birds
Of passage; where their instinct leads
They range abroad for thoughts and words,
And from all climes bring home the seeds
That germinate in flowers or weeds.
They are not fowls in barnyards born
To cackle o'er a grain of corn;
And, if you shut the horizon down
To the small limits of their town,
What do you but degrade your bard
Till he at last becomes as one
Who thinks the all-encircling sun
Rises and sets in his back yard?"

The Theologian said again:
"It may be so; yet I maintain
That what is native still is best,
And little care I for the rest.
'T is a long story; time would fail
To tell it, and the hour is late;
We will not waste it in debate,
But listen to our Landlord's tale."

And thus the sword of Damocles
Descending not by slow degrees,
But suddenly, on the Landlord fell,
Who blushing, and with much demur
And many vain apologies,
Plucking up heart, began to tell
The Rhyme of one Sir Christopher.



THE LANDLORD'S TALE

THE RHYME OF SIR CHRISTOPHER

It was Sir Christopher Gardiner,
Knight of the Holy Sepulchre,
From Merry England over the sea,
Who stepped upon this continent
As if his august presence lent
A glory to the colony.

You should have seen him in the street
Of the little Boston of Winthrop's time,
His rapier dangling at his feet
Doublet and hose and boots complete,
Prince Rupert hat with ostrich plume,
Gloves that exhaled a faint perfume,
Luxuriant curls and air sublime,
And superior manners now obsolete!

He had a way of saying things
That made one think of courts and kings,
And lords and ladies of high degree;
So that not having been at court
Seemed something very little short
Of treason or lese-majesty,
Such an accomplished knight was he.

His dwelling was just beyond the town,
At what he called his country-seat;
For, careless of Fortune's smile or frown,
And weary grown of the world and its ways,
He wished to pass the rest of his days
In a private life and a calm retreat.

But a double life was the life he led,
And, while professing to be in search
Of a godly course, and willing, he said,
Nay, anxious to join the Puritan church,
He made of all this but small account,
And passed his idle hours instead
With roystering Morton of Merry Mount,
That pettifogger from Furnival's Inn,
Lord of misrule and riot and sin,
Who looked on the wine when it was red.

This country-seat was little more
Than a cabin of log's; but in front of the door
A modest flower-bed thickly sown
With sweet alyssum and columbine
Made those who saw it at once divine
The touch of some other hand than his own.
And first it was whispered, and then it was known,
That he in secret was harboring there
A little lady with golden hair,
Whom he called his cousin, but whom he had wed
In the Italian manner, as men said,
And great was the scandal everywhere.

But worse than this was the vague surmise,
Though none could vouch for it or aver,
That the Knight of the Holy Sepulchre
Was only a Papist in disguise;
And the more to imbitter their bitter lives,
And the more to trouble the public mind,
Came letters from England, from two other wives,
Whom he had carelessly left behind;
Both of them letters of such a kind
As made the governor hold his breath;
The one imploring him straight to send
The husband home, that he might amend;
The other asking his instant death,
As the only way to make an end.

The wary governor deemed it right,
When all this wickedness was revealed,
To send his warrant signed and sealed,
And take the body of the knight.
Armed with this mighty instrument,
The marshal, mounting his gallant steed,
Rode forth from town at the top of his speed,
And followed by all his bailiffs bold,
As if on high achievement bent,
To storm some castle or stronghold,
Challenge the warders on the wall,
And seize in his ancestral hall
A robber-baron grim and old.

But when though all the dust and heat
He came to Sir Christopher's country-seat,
No knight he found, nor warder there,
But the little lady with golden hair,
Who was gathering in the bright sunshine
The sweet alyssum and columbine;
While gallant Sir Christopher, all so gay,
Being forewarned, through the postern gate
Of his castle wall had tripped away,
And was keeping a little holiday
In the forests, that bounded his estate.

Then as a trusty squire and true
The marshal searched the castle through,
Not crediting what the lady said;
Searched from cellar to garret in vain,
And, finding no knight, came out again
And arrested the golden damsel instead,
And bore her in triumph into the town,
While from her eyes the tears rolled down
On the sweet alyssum and columbine,
That she held in her fingers white and fine.

The governor's heart was moved to see
So fair a creature caught within
The snares of Satan and of sin,
And he read her a little homily
On the folly and wickedness of the lives
Of women, half cousins and half wives;
But, seeing that naught his words availed,
He sent her away in a ship that sailed
For Merry England over the sea,
To the other two wives in the old countree,
To search her further, since he had failed
To come at the heart of the mystery.

Meanwhile Sir Christopher wandered away
Through pathless woods for a month and a day,
Shooting pigeons, and sleeping at night
With the noble savage, who took delight
In his feathered hat and his velvet vest,
His gun and his rapier and the rest.
But as soon as the noble savage heard
That a bounty was offered for this gay bird,
He wanted to slay him out of hand,
And bring in his beautiful scalp for a show,
Like the glossy head of a kite or crow,
Until he was made to understand
They wanted the bird alive, not dead;
Then he followed him whithersoever he fled,
Through forest and field, and hunted him down,
And brought him prisoner into the town.

Alas! it was a rueful sight,
To see this melancholy knight
In such a dismal and hapless case;
His hat deformed by stain and dent,
His plumage broken, his doublet rent,
His beard and flowing locks forlorn,
Matted, dishevelled, and unshorn,
His boots with dust and mire besprent;
But dignified in his disgrace,
And wearing an unblushing face.
And thus before the magistrate
He stood to hear the doom of fate.
In vain he strove with wonted ease
To modify and extenuate
His evil deeds in church and state,
For gone was now his power to please;
And his pompous words had no more weight
Than feathers flying in the breeze.

With suavity equal to his own
The governor lent a patient ear
To the speech evasive and highflown,
In which he endeavored to make clear
That colonial laws were too severe
When applied to a gallant cavalier,
A gentleman born, and so well known,
And accustomed to move in a higher sphere.

All this the Puritan governor heard,
And deigned in answer never a word;
But in summary manner shipped away,
In a vessel that sailed from Salem bay,
This splendid and famous cavalier,
With his Rupert hat and his popery,
To Merry England over the sea,
As being unmeet to inhabit here.

Thus endeth the Rhyme of Sir Christopher,
Knight of the Holy Sepulchre,
The first who furnished this barren land
With apples of Sodom and ropes of sand.



FINALE

These are the tales those merry guests
Told to each other, well or ill;
Like summer birds that lift their crests
Above the borders of their nests
And twitter, and again are still.

These are the tales, or new or old,
In idle moments idly told;
Flowers of the field with petals thin,
Lilies that neither toil nor spin,
And tufts of wayside weeds and gorse
Hung in the parlor of the inn
Beneath the sign of the Red Horse.

And still, reluctant to retire,
The friends sat talking by the fire
And watched the smouldering embers burn
To ashes, and flash up again
Into a momentary glow,
Lingering like them when forced to go,
And going when they would remain;
For on the morrow they must turn
Their faces homeward, and the pain
Of parting touched with its unrest
A tender nerve in every breast.

But sleep at last the victory won;
They must be stirring with the sun,
And drowsily good night they said,
And went still gossiping to bed,
And left the parlor wrapped in gloom.
The only live thing in the room
Was the old clock, that in its pace
Kept time with the revolving spheres
And constellations in their flight,
And struck with its uplifted mace
The dark, unconscious hours of night,
To senseless and unlistening ears.

Uprose the sun; and every guest,
Uprisen, was soon equipped and dressed
For journeying home and city-ward;
The old stage-coach was at the door,
With horses harnessed, long before
The sunshine reached the withered sward
Beneath the oaks, whose branches hoar
Murmured: "Farewell forevermore."

"Farewell!" the portly Landlord cried;
"Farewell!" the parting guests replied,
But little thought that nevermore
Their feet would pass that threshold o'er;
That nevermore together there
Would they assemble, free from care,
To hear the oaks' mysterious roar,
And breathe the wholesome country air.

Where are they now?  What lands and skies
Paint pictures in their friendly eyes?
What hope deludes, what promise cheers,
What pleasant voices fill their ears?
Two are beyond the salt sea waves,
And three already in their graves.
Perchance the living still may look
Into the pages of this book,
And see the days of long ago
Floating and fleeting to and fro,
As in the well-remembered brook
They saw the inverted landscape gleam,
And their own faces like a dream
Look up upon them from below.



FLOWER-DE-LUCE

FLOWER-DE-LUCE

Beautiful lily, dwelling by still rivers,
    Or solitary mere,
Or where the sluggish meadow-brook delivers
    Its waters to the weir!

Thou laughest at the mill, the whir and worry
    Of spindle and of loom,
And the great wheel that toils amid the hurry
    And rushing of the flame.

Born in the purple, born to joy and pleasance,
    Thou dost not toil nor spin,
But makest glad and radiant with thy presence
    The meadow and the lin.

The wind blows, and uplifts thy drooping banner,
    And round thee throng and run
The rushes, the green yeomen of thy manor,
    The outlaws of the sun.

The burnished dragon-fly is thine attendant,
    And tilts against the field,
And down the listed sunbeam rides resplendent
    With steel-blue mail and shield.

Thou art the Iris, fair among the fairest,
    Who, armed with golden rod
And winged with the celestial azure, bearest
    The message of some God.

Thou art the Muse, who far from crowded cities
    Hauntest the sylvan streams,
Playing on pipes of reed the artless ditties
    That come to us as dreams.

O flower-de-luce, bloom on, and let the river
    Linger to kiss thy feet!
O flower of song, bloom on, and make forever
    The world more fair and sweet.



PALINGENESIS

I lay upon the headland-height, and listened
To the incessant sobbing of the sea
    In caverns under me,
And watched the waves, that tossed and fled and glistened,
Until the rolling meadows of amethyst
    Melted away in mist.

Then suddenly, as one from sleep, I started;
For round about me all the sunny capes
    Seemed peopled with the shapes
Of those whom I had known in days departed,
Apparelled in the loveliness which gleams
    On faces seen in dreams.

A moment only, and the light and glory
Faded away, and the disconsolate shore
    Stood lonely as before;
And the wild-roses of the promontory
Around me shuddered in the wind, and shed
    Their petals of pale red.

There was an old belief that in the embers
Of all things their primordial form exists,
    And cunning alchemists
Could re-create the rose with all its members
From its own ashes, but without the bloom,
    Without the lost perfume.

Ah me! what wonder-working, occult science
Can from the ashes in our hearts once more
    The rose of youth restore?
What craft of alchemy can bid defiance
To time and change, and for a single hour
    Renew this phantom-flower?

"O, give me back," I cried, "the vanished splendors,
The breath of morn, and the exultant strife,
    When the swift stream of life
Bounds o'er its rocky channel, and surrenders
The pond, with all its lilies, for the leap
    Into the unknown deep!"

And the sea answered, with a lamentation,
Like some old prophet wailing, and it said,
    "Alas! thy youth is dead!
It breathes no more, its heart has no pulsation;
In the dark places with the dead of old
    It lies forever cold!"

Then said I, "From its consecrated cerements
I will not drag this sacred dust again,
    Only to give me pain;
But, still remembering all the lost endearments,
Go on my way, like one who looks before,
    And turns to weep no more."

Into what land of harvests, what plantations
Bright with autumnal foliage and the glow
    Of sunsets burning low;
Beneath what midnight skies, whose constellations
Light up the spacious avenues between
    This world and the unseen!

Amid what friendly greetings and caresses,
What households, though not alien, yet not mine,
    What bowers of rest divine;
To what temptations in lone wildernesses,
What famine of the heart, what pain and loss,
    The bearing of what cross!

I do not know; nor will I vainly question
Those pages of the mystic book which hold
    The story still untold,
But without rash conjecture or suggestion
Turn its last leaves in reverence and good heed,
    Until "The End" I read.



THE BRIDGE OF CLOUD

Burn, O evening hearth, and waken
  Pleasant visions, as of old!
Though the house by winds be shaken,
  Safe I keep this room of gold!

Ah, no longer wizard Fancy
  Builds her castles in the air,
Luring me by necromancy
  Up the never-ending stair!

But, instead, she builds me bridges
  Over many a dark ravine,
Where beneath the gusty ridges
  Cataracts dash and roar unseen.

And I cross them, little heeding
  Blast of wind or torrent's roar,
As I follow the receding
  Footsteps that have gone before.

Naught avails the imploring gesture,
  Naught avails the cry of pain!
When I touch the flying vesture,
  'T is the gray robe of the rain.

Baffled I return, and, leaning
  O'er the parapets of cloud,
Watch the mist that intervening
  Wraps the valley in its shroud.

And the sounds of life ascending
  Faintly, vaguely, meet the ear,
Murmur of bells and voices blending
  With the rush of waters near.

Well I know what there lies hidden,
  Every tower and town and farm,
And again the land forbidden
  Reassumes its vanished charm.

Well I know the secret places,
  And the nests in hedge and tree;
At what doors are friendly faces,
  In what hearts are thoughts of me.

Through the mist and darkness sinking,
  Blown by wind and beaten by shower,
Down I fling the thought I'm thinking,
  Down I toss this Alpine flower.



HAWTHORNE

MAY 23, 1864

How beautiful it was, that one bright day
  In the long week of rain!
Though all its splendor could not chase away
  The omnipresent pain.

The lovely town was white with apple-blooms,
  And the great elms o'erhead
Dark shadows wove on their aerial looms
  Shot through with golden thread.

Across the meadows, by the gray old manse,
  The historic river flowed:
I was as one who wanders in a trance,
  Unconscious of his road.

The faces of familiar friends seemed strange;
  Their voices I could hear,
And yet the words they uttered seemed to change
  Their meaning to my ear.

For the one face I looked for was not there,
  The one low voice was mute;
Only an unseen presence filled the air,
  And baffled my pursuit.

Now I look back, and meadow, manse, and stream
  Dimly my thought defines;
I only see--a dream within a dream--
  The hill-top hearsed with pines.

I only hear above his place of rest
  Their tender undertone,
The infinite longings of a troubled breast,
  The voice so like his own.

There in seclusion and remote from men
  The wizard hand lies cold,
Which at its topmost speed let fall the pen,
  And left the tale half told.

Ah! who shall lift that wand of magic power,
  And the lost clew regain?
The unfinished window in Aladdin's tower
  Unfinished must remain!



CHRISTMAS BELLS

I heard the bells on Christmas Day
Their old, familiar carols play,
     And wild and sweet
     The words repeat
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!

And thought how, as the day had come,
The belfries of all Christendom
     Had rolled along
     The unbroken song
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!

Till, ringing, singing on its way,
The world revolved from night to day,
     A voice, a chime,
     A chant sublime
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!

Then from each black, accursed mouth
The cannon thundered in the South,
     And with the sound
     The carols drowned
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!

It was as if an earthquake rent
The hearth-stones of a continent,
     And made forlorn
     The households born
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!

And in despair I bowed my head;
"There is no peace on earth," I said:
     "For hate is strong,
     And mocks the song
Of peace on earth, good-will to men!"

Then pealed the bells more loud and deep:
"God is not dead; nor doth he sleep!
     The Wrong shall fail,
     The Right prevail,
With peace on earth, good-will to men!"



THE WIND OVER THE CHIMNEY

See, the fire is sinking low,
Dusky red the embers glow,
  While above them still I cower,
While a moment more I linger,
Though the clock, with lifted finger,
  Points beyond the midnight hour.

Sings the blackened log a tune
Learned in some forgotten June
  From a school-boy at his play,
When they both were young together,
Heart of youth and summer weather
  Making all their holiday.

And the night-wind rising, hark!
How above there in the dark,
  In the midnight and the snow,
Ever wilder, fiercer, grander,
Like the trumpets of Iskander,
  All the noisy chimneys blow!

Every quivering tongue of flame
Seems to murmur some great name,
  Seems to say to me, "Aspire!"
But the night-wind answers, "Hollow
Are the visions that you follow,
  Into darkness sinks your fire!"

Then the flicker of the blaze
Gleams on volumes of old days,
  Written by masters of the art,
Loud through whose majestic pages
Rolls the melody of ages,
  Throb the harp-strings of the heart.

And again the tongues of flame
Start exulting and exclaim:
  "These are prophets, bards, and seers;
In the horoscope of nations,
Like ascendant constellations,
  They control the coming years."

But the night-wind cries: "Despair!
Those who walk with feet of air
  Leave no long-enduring marks;
At God's forges incandescent
Mighty hammers beat incessant,
  These are but the flying sparks.

"Dust are all the hands that wrought;
Books are sepulchres of thought;
  The dead laurels of the dead
Rustle for a moment only,
Like the withered leaves in lonely
  Churchyards at some passing tread."

Suddenly the flame sinks down;
Sink the rumors of renown;
  And alone the night-wind drear
Clamors louder, wilder, vaguer,--
"'T is the brand of Meleager
  Dying on the hearth-stone here!"

And I answer,--"Though it be,
Why should that discomfort me?
  No endeavor is in vain;
Its reward is in the doing,
And the rapture of pursuing
  Is the prize the vanquished gain."



THE BELLS OF LYNN

HEARD AT NAHANT

O curfew of the setting sun!  O Bells of Lynn!
O requiem of the dying day!  O Bells of Lynn!

From the dark belfries of yon cloud-cathedral wafted,
Your sounds aerial seem to float, O Bells of Lynn!

Borne on the evening wind across the crimson twilight,
O'er land and sea they rise and fall, O Bells of Lynn!

The fisherman in his boat, far out beyond the headland,
Listens, and leisurely rows ashore, O Bells of Lynn!

Over the shining sands the wandering cattle homeward
Follow each other at your call, O Bells of Lynn!

The distant lighthouse hears, and with his flaming signal
Answers you, passing the watchword on, O Bells of Lynn!

And down the darkening coast run the tumultuous surges,
And clap their hands, and shout to you, O Bells of Lynn!

Till from the shuddering sea, with your wild incantations,
Ye summon up the spectral moon, O Bells of Lynn!

And startled at the sight like the weird woman of Endor,
Ye cry aloud, and then are still, O Bells of Lynn!



KILLED AT THE FORD.

He is dead, the beautiful youth,
The heart of honor, the tongue of truth,
He, the life and light of us all,
Whose voice was blithe as a bugle-call,
Whom all eyes followed with one consent,
The cheer of whose laugh, and whose pleasant word,
Hushed all murmurs of discontent.

Only last night, as we rode along,
Down the dark of the mountain gap,
To visit the picket-guard at the ford,
Little dreaming of any mishap,
He was humming the words of some old song:
"Two red roses he had on his cap,
And another he bore at the point of his sword."

Sudden and swift a whistling ball
Came out of a wood, and the voice was still;
Something I heard in the darkness fall,
And for a moment my blood grew chill;
I spake in a whisper, as he who speaks
In a room where some one is lying dead;
But he made no answer to what I said.

We lifted him up to his saddle again,
And through the mire and the mist and the rain
Carried him back to the silent camp,
And laid him as if asleep on his bed;
And I saw by the light of the surgeon's lamp
Two white roses upon his cheeks,
And one, just over his heart, blood-red!

And I saw in a vision how far and fleet
That fatal bullet went speeding forth,
Till it reached a town in the distant North,
Till it reached a house in a sunny street,
Till it reached a heart that ceased to beat
Without a murmur, without a cry;
And a bell was tolled, in that far-off town,
For one who had passed from cross to crown,
And the neighbors wondered that she should die.



GIOTTO'S TOWER

How many lives, made beautiful and sweet
  By self-devotion and by self-restraint,
  Whose pleasure is to run without complaint
  On unknown errands of the Paraclete,
Wanting the reverence of unshodden feet,
  Fail of the nimbus which the artists paint
  Around the shining forehead of the saint,
  And are in their completeness incomplete!
In the old Tuscan town stands Giotto's tower,
  The lily of Florence blossoming in stone,--
  A vision, a delight, and a desire,--
The builder's perfect and centennial flower,
  That in the night of ages bloomed alone,
  But wanting still the glory of the spire.



TO-MORROW

'T is late at night, and in the realm of sleep
  My little lambs are folded like the flocks;
  From room to room I hear the wakeful clocks
  Challenge the passing hour, like guards that keep
Their solitary watch on tower and steep;
  Far off I hear the crowing of the cocks,
  And through the opening door that time unlocks
  Feel the fresh breathing of To-morrow creep.
To-morrow! the mysterious, unknown guest,
  Who cries to me: "Remember Barmecide,
  And tremble to be happy with the rest."
And I make answer: "I am satisfied;
  I dare not ask; I know not what is best;
  God hath already said what shall betide."



DIVINA COMMEDIA

I

Oft have I seen at some cathedral door
  A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,
  Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet
  Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor
Kneel to repeat his paternoster o'er;
  Far off the noises of the world retreat;
  The loud vociferations of the street
  Become an undistinguishable roar.
So, as I enter here from day to day,
  And leave my burden at this minster gate,
  Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,
The tumult of the time disconsolate
  To inarticulate murmurs dies away,
  While the eternal ages watch and wait.


II

How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!
  This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves
  Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves
  Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,
And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!
  But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves
  Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,
  And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!
Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,
  What exultations trampling on despair,
  What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,
What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,
  Uprose this poem of the earth and air,
  This medieval miracle of song!


III

I enter, and I see thee in the gloom
  Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!
  And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.
  The air is filled with some unknown perfume;
The congregation of the dead make room
  For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;
  Like rooks that haunt Ravenna's groves of pine
  The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.
From the confessionals I hear arise
  Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,
  And lamentations from the crypts below;
And then a voice celestial, that begins
  With the pathetic words, "Although your sins
  As scarlet be," and ends with "as the snow."


IV

With snow-white veil and garments as of flame,
  She stands before thee, who so long ago
  Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe
  From which thy song and all its splendors came;
And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,
  The ice about thy heart melts as the snow
  On mountain height; and in swift overflow
  Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.
Thou makest full confession; and a gleam,
  As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,
  Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;
Lethe and Eunoe--the remembered dream
  And the forgotten sorrow--bring at last
  That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.


V

I lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze
  With forms of saints and holy men who died,
  Here martyred and hereafter glorified;
  And the great Rose upon its leaves displays
Christ's Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,
  With splendor upon splendor multiplied;
  And Beatrice again at Dante's side
  No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.
And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs
  Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love,
  And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;
And the melodious bells among the spires
  O'er all the house-tops and through heaven above
  Proclaim the elevation of the Host!


VI

O star of morning and of liberty!
  O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines
  Above the darkness of the Apennines,
  Forerunner of the day that is to be!
The voices of the city and the sea,
  The voices of the mountains and the pines,
  Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines
  Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!
Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,
  Through all the nations, and a sound is heard,
  As of a mighty wind, and men devout,
Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,
  In their own language hear thy wondrous word,
  And many are amazed and many doubt.



NOEL.

ENVOYE A M. AGASSIZ, LA VEILLE DE NOEL 1864,
AVEC UN PANIER DE VINS DIVERS

L'Academie en respect,
Nonobstant l'incorrection
A la faveur du sujet,
     Ture-lure,
N'y fera point de rature;
Noel! ture-lure-lure.
          -- Gui Barozai

Quand les astres de Noel
Brillaient, palpitaient au ciel,
Six gaillards, et chacun ivre,
Chantaient gaiment dans le givre,
     "Bons amis,
Allons donc chez Agassiz!"

Ces illustres Pelerins
D'Outre-Mer adroits et fins,
Se donnant des airs de pretre,
A l'envi se vantaient d'etre
     "Bons amis,
De Jean Rudolphe Agassiz!"

Oeil-de-Perdrix, grand farceur,
Sans reproche et sans pudeur,
Dans son patois de Bourgogne,
Bredouillait comme un ivrogne,
     "Bons amis,
J'ai danse chez Agassiz!"

Verzenay le Champenois,
Bon Francais, point New-Yorquois,
Mais des environs d'Avize,
Fredonne a mainte reprise,
     "Bons amis,
J'ai chante chez Agassiz!"

A cote marchait un vieux
Hidalgo, mais non mousseux;
Dans le temps de Charlemagne
Fut son pere Grand d'Espagne!
     "Bons amis,
J'ai dine chez Agassiz!"

Derriere eux un Bordelais,
Gascon, s'il en fut jamais,
Parfume de poesie
Riait, chantait, plein de vie,
     "Bons amis,
J'ai soupe chez Agassiz!"

Avec ce beau cadet roux,
Bras dessus et bras dessous,
Mine altiere et couleur terne,
Vint le Sire de Sauterne;
     "Bons amis,
J'ai couche chez Agassiz!"

Mais le dernier de ces preux,
Etait un pauvre Chartreux,
Qui disait, d'un ton robuste,
"Benedictions sur le Juste!
     Bons amis,
Benissons Pere Agassiz!"

Ils arrivent trois a trois,
Montent l'escalier de bois
Clopin-clopant! quel gendarme
Peut permettre ce vacarme,
     Bons amis,
A la porte d'Agassiz!

"Ouvrer donc, mon bon Seigneur,
Ouvrez vite et n'ayez peur;
Ouvrez, ouvrez, car nous sommes
Gens de bien et gentilshommes,
     Bons amis
De la famille Agassiz!"

Chut, ganaches! taisez-vous!
C'en est trop de vos glouglous;
Epargnez aux Philosophes
Vos abominables strophes!
     Bons amis,
Respectez mon Agassiz!


**************

BIRDS OF PASSAGE

FLIGHT THE THIRD

FATA MORGANA

O sweet illusions of Song,
  That tempt me everywhere,
In the lonely fields, and the throng
  Of the crowded thoroughfare!

I approach, and ye vanish away,
  I grasp you, and ye are gone;
But ever by nigh an day,
  The melody soundeth on.

As the weary traveller sees
  In desert or prairie vast,
Blue lakes, overhung with trees,
  That a pleasant shadow cast;

Fair towns with turrets high,
  And shining roofs of gold,
That vanish as he draws nigh,
  Like mists together rolled,--

So I wander and wander along,
  And forever before me gleams
The shining city of song,
  In the beautiful land of dreams.

But when I would enter the gate
  Of that golden atmosphere,
It is gone, and I wander and wait
  For the vision to reappear.



THE HAUNTED CHAMBER

Each heart has its haunted chamber,
  Where the silent moonlight falls!
On the floor are mysterious footsteps,
  There are whispers along the walls!

And mine at times is haunted
  By phantoms of the Past
As motionless as shadows
  By the silent moonlight cast.

A form sits by the window,
  That is not seen by day,
For as soon as the dawn approaches
  It vanishes away.

It sits there in the moonlight
  Itself as pale and still,
And points with its airy finger
  Across the window-sill.

Without before the window,
  There stands a gloomy pine,
Whose boughs wave upward and downward
  As wave these thoughts of mine.

And underneath its branches
  Is the grave of a little child,
Who died upon life's threshold,
  And never wept nor smiled.

What are ye, O pallid phantoms!
  That haunt my troubled brain?
That vanish when day approaches,
  And at night return again?

What are ye, O pallid phantoms!
  But the statues without breath,
That stand on the bridge overarching
  The silent river of death?



THE MEETING

After so long an absence
  At last we meet again:
Does the meeting give us pleasure,
  Or does it give us pain?

The tree of life has been shaken,
  And but few of us linger now,
Like the Prophet's two or three berries
  In the top of the uppermost bough.

We cordially greet each other
  In the old, familiar tone;
And we think, though we do not say it,
  How old and gray he is grown!

We speak of a Merry Christmas
  And many a Happy New Year
But each in his heart is thinking
  Of those that are not here.

We speak of friends and their fortunes,
  And of what they did and said,
Till the dead alone seem living,
  And the living alone seem dead.

And at last we hardly distinguish
  Between the ghosts and the guests;
And a mist and shadow of sadness
  Steals over our merriest jests.



VOX POPULI

When Mazarvan the Magician,
  Journeyed westward through Cathay,
Nothing heard he but the praises
  Of Badoura on his way.

But the lessening rumor ended
  When he came to Khaledan,
There the folk were talking only
  Of Prince Camaralzaman,

So it happens with the poets:
  Every province hath its own;
Camaralzaman is famous
  Where Badoura is unknown.



THE CASTLE-BUILDER

A gentle boy, with soft and silken locks
  A dreamy boy, with brown and tender eyes,
A castle-builder, with his wooden blocks,
  And towers that touch imaginary skies.

A fearless rider on his father's knee,
  An eager listener unto stories told
At the Round Table of the nursery,
  Of heroes and adventures manifold.

There will be other towers for thee to build;
  There will be other steeds for thee to ride;
There will be other legends, and all filled
  With greater marvels and more glorified.

Build on, and make thy castles high and fair,
  Rising and reaching upward to the skies;
Listen to voices in the upper air,
  Nor lose thy simple faith in mysteries.



CHANGED

From the outskirts of the town
  Where of old the mile-stone stood.
Now a stranger, looking down
I behold the shadowy crown
  Of the dark and haunted wood.

Is it changed, or am I changed?
  Ah! the oaks are fresh and green,
But the friends with whom I ranged
Through their thickets are estranged
  By the years that intervene.

Bright as ever flows the sea,
  Bright as ever shines the sun,
But alas! they seem to me
Not the sun that used to be,
  Not the tides that used to run.



THE CHALLENGE

I have a vague remembrance
  Of a story, that is told
In some ancient Spanish legend
  Or chronicle of old.

It was when brave King Sanchez
  Was before Zamora slain,
And his great besieging army
  Lay encamped upon the plain.

Don Diego de Ordonez
  Sallied forth in front of all,
And shouted loud his challenge
  To the warders on the wall.

All the people of Zamora,
  Both the born and the unborn,
As traitors did he challenge
  With taunting words of scorn.

The living, in their houses,
  And in their graves, the dead!
And the waters of their rivers,
  And their wine, and oil, and bread!

There is a greater army,
  That besets us round with strife,
A starving, numberless army,
  At all the gates of life.

The poverty-stricken millions
  Who challenge our wine and bread,
And impeach us all as traitors,
  Both the living and the dead.

And whenever I sit at the banquet,
  Where the feast and song are high,
Amid the mirth and the music
  I can hear that fearful cry.

And hollow and haggard faces
  Look into the lighted hall,
And wasted hands are extended
  To catch the crumbs that fall.

For within there is light and plenty,
  And odors fill the air;
But without there is cold and darkness,
  And hunger and despair.

And there in the camp of famine,
  In wind and cold and rain,
Christ, the great Lord of the army,
  Lies dead upon the plain!



THE BROOK AND THE WAVE

The brooklet came from the mountain,
  As sang the bard of old,
Running with feet of silver
  Over the sands of gold!

Far away in the briny ocean
  There rolled a turbulent wave,
Now singing along the sea-beach,
  Now howling along the cave.

And the brooklet has found the billow
  Though they flowed so far apart,
And has filled with its freshness and sweetness
  That turbulent bitter heart!



AFTERMATH

When the summer fields are mown,
When the birds are fledged and flown,
  And the dry leaves strew the path;
With the falling of the snow,
With the cawing of the crow,
Once again the fields we mow
  And gather in the aftermath.

Not the sweet, new grass with flowers
Is this harvesting of ours;
  Not the upland clover bloom;
But the rowen mired with weeds,
Tangled tufts from marsh and meads,
Where the poppy drops its seeds
  In the silence and the gloom.



THE MASQUE OF PANDORA

I

THE WORKSHOP OF HEPHAESTUS

HEPHAESTUS (standing before the statue of Pandora.)
Not fashioned out of gold, like Hera's throne,
Nor forged of iron like the thunderbolts
Of Zeus omnipotent, or other works
Wrought by my hands at Lemnos or Olympus,
But moulded in soft clay, that unresisting
Yields itself to the touch, this lovely form
Before me stands, perfect in every part.
Not Aphrodite's self appeared more fair,
When first upwafted by caressing winds
She came to high Olympus, and the gods
Paid homage to her beauty.  Thus her hair
Was cinctured; thus her floating drapery
Was like a cloud about her, and her face
Was radiant with the sunshine and the sea.

THE VOICE OF ZEUS.
Is thy work done, Hephaestus?

HEPHAESTUS.
It is finished!

THE VOICE.
Not finished till I breathe the breath of life
Into her nostrils, and she moves and speaks.

HEPHAESTUS.
Will she become immortal like ourselves?

THE VOICE.
The form that thou hast fashioned out of clay
Is of the earth and mortal; but the spirit,
The life, the exhalation of my breath,
Is of diviner essence and immortal.
The gods shall shower on her their benefactions,
She shall possess all gifts: the gift of song,
The gift of eloquence, the gift of beauty,
The fascination and the nameless charm
That shall lead all men captive.

HEPHAESTUS.
Wherefore? wherefore?

(A wind shakes the house.)

I hear the rushing of a mighty wind
Through all the halls and chambers of my house!
Her parted lips inhale it, and her bosom
Heaves with the inspiration.  As a reed
Beside a river in the rippling current
Bends to and fro, she bows or lifts her head.
She gazes round about as if amazed;
She is alive; she breathes, but yet she speaks not!

(PANDORA descends from the pedestal.)


CHORUS OF THE GRACES

AGLAIA.
In the workshop of Hephaestus
    What is this I see?
Have the Gods to four increased us
    Who were only three?
Beautiful in form and feature,
    Lovely as the day,
Can there be so fair a creature
    Formed of common clay?

THALIA.
O sweet, pale face!  O lovely eyes of azure,
  Clear as the waters of a brook that run
  Limpid and laughing in the summer sun!
  O golden hair that like a miser's treasure
In its abundance overflows the measure!
  O graceful form, that cloudlike floatest on
  With the soft, undulating gait of one
  Who moveth as if motion were a pleasure!
By what name shall I call thee?  Nymph or Muse,
  Callirrhoe or Urania?  Some sweet name
  Whose every syllable is a caress
Would best befit thee; but I cannot choose,
  Nor do I care to choose; for still the same,
  Nameless or named, will be thy loveliness.

EUPHROSYNE.
Dowered with all celestial gifts,
    Skilled in every art
That ennobles and uplifts
    And delights the heart,
Fair on earth shall be thy fame
    As thy face is fair,
And Pandora be the name
    Thou henceforth shalt bear.


II

OLYMPUS.

HERMES (putting on his sandals.)
Much must he toil who serves the Immortal Gods,
And I, who am their herald, most of all.
No rest have I, nor respite.  I no sooner
Unclasp the winged sandals from my feet,
Than I again must clasp them, and depart
Upon some foolish errand.  But to-day
The errand is not foolish.  Never yet
With greater joy did I obey the summons
That sends me earthward.  I will fly so swiftly
That my caduceus in the whistling air
Shall make a sound like the Pandaean pipes,
Cheating the shepherds; for to-day I go,
Commissioned by high-thundering Zeus, to lead
A maiden to Prometheus, in his tower,
And by my cunning arguments persuade him
To marry her.  What mischief lies concealed
In this design I know not; but I know
Who thinks of marrying hath already taken
One step upon the road to penitence.
Such embassies delight me.  Forth I launch
On the sustaining air, nor fear to fall
Like Icarus, nor swerve aside like him
Who drove amiss Hyperion's fiery steeds.
I sink, I fly! The yielding element
Folds itself round about me like an arm,
And holds me as a mother holds her child.


III

TOWER OF PROMETHEUS ON MOUNT CAUCASUS

PROMETHEUS.
I hear the trumpet of Alectryon
Proclaim the dawn.  The stars begin to fade,
And all the heavens are full of prophecies
And evil auguries.  Blood-red last night
I saw great Kronos rise; the crescent moon
Sank through the mist, as if it were the scythe
His parricidal hand had flung far down
The western steeps.  O ye Immortal Gods,
What evil are ye plotting and contriving?

(HERMES and PANDORA at the threshold.)

PANDORA.
I cannot cross the threshold.  An unseen
And icy hand repels me.  These blank walls
Oppress me with their weight!

PROMETHEUS.
Powerful ye are,
But not omnipotent.  Ye cannot fight
Against Necessity.  The Fates control you,
As they do us, and so far we are equals!

PANDORA.
Motionless, passionless, companionless,
He sits there muttering in his beard.  His voice
Is like a river flowing underground!

HERMES.
Prometheus, hail!

PROMETHEUS.
Who calls me?

HERMES.
It is I.
Dost thou not know me?

PROMETHEUS.
By thy winged cap
And winged heels I know thee.  Thou art Hermes,
Captain of thieves!  Hast thou again been stealing
The heifers of Admetus in the sweet
Meadows of asphodel? or Hera's girdle?
Or the earth-shaking trident of Poseidon?

HERMES.
And thou, Prometheus; say, hast thou again
Been stealing fire from Helios' chariot-wheels
To light thy furnaces?

PROMETHEUS.
Why comest thou hither
So early in the dawn?

HERMES.
The Immortal Gods
Know naught of late or early.  Zeus himself
The omnipotent hath sent me.

PROMETHEUS.
For what purpose?

HERMES.
To bring this maiden to thee.

PROMETHEUS.
I mistrust
The Gods and all their gifts. If they have sent her
It is for no good purpose.

HERMES.
What disaster
Could she bring on thy house, who is a woman?

PROMETHEUS.
The Gods are not my friends, nor am I theirs.
Whatever comes from them, though in a shape
As beautiful as this, is evil only.
Who art thou?

PANDORA.
One who, though to thee unknown,
Yet knoweth thee.

PROMETHEUS.
How shouldst thou know me, woman?

PANDORA.
Who knoweth not Prometheus the humane?

PROMETHEUS.
Prometheus the unfortunate; to whom
Both Gods and men have shown themselves ungrateful.
When every spark was quenched on every hearth
Throughout the earth, I brought to man the fire
And all its ministrations.  My reward
Hath been the rock and vulture.

HERMES.
But the Gods
At last relent and pardon.

PROMETHEUS.
They relent not;
They pardon not; they are implacable,
Revengeful, unforgiving!

HERMES.
As a pledge
Of reconciliation they have sent to thee
This divine being, to be thy companion,
And bring into thy melancholy house
The sunshine and the fragrance of her youth.

PROMETHEUS.
I need them not.  I have within myself
All that my heart desires; the ideal beauty
Which the creative faculty of mind
Fashions and follows in a thousand shapes
More lovely than the real.  My own thoughts
Are my companions; my designs and labors
And aspirations are my only friends.

HERMES.
Decide not rashly.  The decision made
Can never be recalled.  The Gods implore not,
Plead not, solicit not; they only offer
Choice and occasion, which once being passed
Return no more.  Dost thou accept the gift?

PROMETHEUS.
No gift of theirs, in whatsoever shape
It comes to me, with whatsoever charm
To fascinate my sense, will I receive.
Leave me.

PANDORA.
Let us go hence.  I will not stay.

HERMES.
We leave thee to thy vacant dreams, and all
The silence and the solitude of thought,
The endless bitterness of unbelief,
The loneliness of existence without love.


CHORUS OF THE FATES

CLOTHO.
How the Titan, the defiant,
The self-centred, self-reliant,
Wrapped in visions and illusions,
Robs himself of life's best gifts!
Till by all the storm-winds shaken,
By the blast of fate o'ertaken,
Hopeless, helpless, and forsaken,
In the mists of his confusions
To the reefs of doom he drifts!

LACHESIS.
Sorely tried and sorely tempted,
From no agonies exempted,
In the penance of his trial,
And the discipline of pain;
Often by illusions cheated,
Often baffled and defeated
In the tasks to be completed,
He, by toil and self-denial,
To the highest shall attain.

ATROPOS.
Tempt no more the noble schemer;
Bear unto some idle dreamer
This new toy and fascination,
This new dalliance and delight!
To the garden where reposes
Epimetheus crowned with roses,
To the door that never closes
Upon pleasure and temptation,
Bring this vision of the night!


IV

THE AIR

HERMES (returning to Olympus.)
As lonely as the tower that he inhabits,
As firm and cold as are the crags about him,
Prometheus stands.  The thunderbolts of Zeus
Alone can move him; but the tender heart
Of Epimetheus, burning at white heat,
Hammers and flames like all his brother's forges!
Now as an arrow from Hyperion's bow,
My errand done, I fly, I float, I soar
Into the air, returning to Olympus.
O joy of motion!  O delight to cleave
The infinite realms of space, the liquid ether,
Through the warm sunshine and the cooling cloud,
Myself as light as sunbeam or as cloud!
With one touch of my swift and winged feet,
I spurn the solid earth, and leave it rocking
As rocks the bough from which a bird takes wing.


V

THE HOUSE OF EPIMETHEUS

EPIMETHEUS.
Beautiful apparition! go not hence!
Surely thou art a Goddess, for thy voice
Is a celestial melody, and thy form
Self-poised as if it floated on the air!

PANDORA.
No Goddess am I, nor of heavenly birth,
But a mere woman fashioned out of clay
And mortal as the rest.

EPIMETHEUS.
Thy face is fair;
There is a wonder in thine azure eyes
That fascinates me.  Thy whole presence seems
A soft desire, a breathing thought of love.
Say, would thy star like Merope's grow dim
If thou shouldst wed beneath thee?

PANDORA.
Ask me not;
I cannot answer thee.  I only know
The Gods have sent me hither.

EPIMETHEUS.
I believe,
And thus believing am most fortunate.
It was not Hermes led thee here, but Eros,
And swifter than his arrows were thine eyes
In wounding me.  There was no moment's space
Between my seeing thee and loving thee.
O, what a telltale face thou hast!  Again
I see the wonder in thy tender eyes.

PANDORA.
They do but answer to the love in thine,
Yet secretly I wonder thou shouldst love me.
Thou knowest me not.

EPIMETHEUS.
Perhaps I know thee better
Than had I known thee longer.  Yet it seems
That I have always known thee, and but now
Have found thee.  Ah, I have been waiting long.

PANDORA.
How beautiful is this house!  The atmosphere
Breathes rest and comfort, and the many chambers
Seem full of welcomes.

EPIMETHEUS.
They not only seem,
But truly are.  This dwelling and its master
Belong to thee.

PANDORA.
Here let me stay forever!
There is a spell upon me.

EPIMETHEUS.
Thou thyself
Art the enchantress, and I feel thy power
Envelop me, and wrap my soul and sense
In an Elysian dream.

PANDORA,
O, let me stay.
How beautiful are all things round about me,
Multiplied by the mirrors on the walls!
What treasures hast thou here!  Yon oaken chest,
Carven with figures and embossed with gold,
Is wonderful to look upon!  What choice
And precious things dost thou keep hidden in it?

EPIMETHEUS.
I know not.  'T is a mystery.

PANDORA.
Hast thou never
Lifted the lid?

EPIMETHEUS.
The oracle forbids.
Safely concealed there from all mortal eyes
Forever sleeps the secret of the Gods.
Seek not to know what they have hidden from thee,
Till they themselves reveal it.

PANDORA.
As thou wilt.

EPIMETHEUS.
Let us go forth from this mysterious place.
The garden walks are pleasant at this hour;
The nightingales among the sheltering boughs
Of populous and many-nested trees
Shall teach me how to woo thee, and shall tell me
By what resistless charms or incantations
They won their mates.

PANDORA.
Thou dost not need a teacher.

(They go out.)


CHORUS OF THE EUMENIDES.
What the Immortals
Confide to thy keeping,
Tell unto no man;
Waking or sleeping,
Closed be thy portals
To friend as to foeman.

Silence conceals it;
The word that is spoken
Betrays and reveals it;
By breath or by token
The charm may be broken.

With shafts of their splendors
The Gods unforgiving
Pursue the offenders,
The dead and the living!
Fortune forsakes them,
Nor earth shall abide them,
Nor Tartarus hide them;
Swift wrath overtakes them!

With useless endeavor,
Forever, forever,
Is Sisyphus rolling
His stone up the mountain!
Immersed in the fountain,
Tantalus tastes not
The water that wastes not!
Through ages increasing
The pangs that afflict him,
With motion unceasing
The wheel of Ixion
Shall torture its victim!


VI

IN THE GARDEN

EPIMETHEUS.
Yon snow-white cloud that sails sublime in ether
Is but the sovereign Zeus, who like a swan
Flies to fair-ankled Leda!

PANDORA.
Or perchance
Ixion's cloud, the shadowy shape of Hera,
That bore the Centaurs.

EPIMETHEUS.
The divine and human.

CHORUS OF BIRDS.
Gently swaying to and fro,
Rocked by all the winds that blow,
Bright with sunshine from above
Dark with shadow from below,
Beak to beak and breast to breast
In the cradle of their nest,
Lie the fledglings of our love.

ECHO.
Love! love!

EPIMETHEUS.
Hark! listen!  Hear how sweetly overhead
The feathered flute-players pipe their songs of love,
And echo answers, love and only love.

CHORUS OF BIRDS.
Every flutter of the wing,
Every note of song we sing,
Every murmur, every tone,
Is of love and love alone.

ECHO.
Love alone!

EPIMETHEUS.
Who would not love, if loving she might be
Changed like Callisto to a star in heaven?

PANDORA.
Ah, who would love, if loving she might be
Like Semele consumed and burnt to ashes?

EPIMETHEUS.
Whence knowest thou these stories?

PANDORA.
Hermes taught me;
He told me all the history of the Gods.

CHORUS OF REEDS.
Evermore a sound shall be
In the reeds of Arcady,
Evermore a low lament
Of unrest and discontent,
As the story is retold
Of the nymph so coy and cold,
Who with frightened feet outran
The pursuing steps of Pan.

EPIMETHEUS.
The pipe of Pan out of these reeds is made,
And when he plays upon it to the shepherds
They pity him, so mournful is the sound.
Be thou not coy and cold as Syrinx was.

PANDORA.
Nor thou as Pan be rude and mannerless.

PROMETHEUS (without).
Ho!  Epimetheus!

EPIMETHEUS.
'T is my brother's voice;
A sound unwelcome and inopportune
As was the braying of Silenus' ass,
Once heard in Cybele's garden.

PANDORA.
Let me go.
I would not be found here.  I would not see him.

(She escapes among the trees.)

CHORUS OF DRYADES.
Haste and hide thee,
Ere too late,
In these thickets intricate;
Lest Prometheus
See and chide thee,
Lest some hurt
Or harm betide thee,
Haste and hide thee!

PROMETHEUS (entering.)
Who was it fled from here?  I saw a shape
Flitting among the trees.

EPIMETHEUS.
It was Pandora.

PROMETHEUS.
O Epimetheus!  Is it then in vain
That I have warned thee?  Let me now implore.
Thou harborest in thy house a dangerous guest.

EPIMETHEUS.
Whom the Gods love they honor with such guests.

PROMETHEUS.
Whom the Gods would destroy they first make mad.

EPIMETHEUS.
Shall I refuse the gifts they send to me?

PROMETHEUS.
Reject all gifts that come from higher powers.

EPIMETHEUS.
Such gifts as this are not to be rejected.

PROMETHEUS.
Make not thyself the slave of any woman.

EPIMETHEUS.
Make not thyself the judge of any man.

PROMETHEUS.
I judge thee not; for thou art more than man;
Thou art descended from Titanic race,
And hast a Titan's strength, and faculties
That make thee godlike; and thou sittest here
Like Heracles spinning Omphale's flax,
And beaten with her sandals.

EPIMETHEUS.
O my brother!
Thou drivest me to madness with thy taunts.

PROMETHEUS.
And me thou drivest to madness with thy follies.
Come with me to my tower on Caucasus:
See there my forges in the roaring caverns,
Beneficent to man, and taste the joy
That springs from labor.  Read with me the stars,
And learn the virtues that lie hidden in plants,
And all things that are useful.

EPIMETHEU5.
O my brother!
I am not as thou art.  Thou dost inherit
Our father's strength, and I our mother's weakness:
The softness of the Oceanides,
The yielding nature that cannot resist.

PROMETHEUS.
Because thou wilt not.

EPIMETHEUS.
Nay; because I cannot.

PROMETHEUS.
Assert thyself; rise up to thy full height;
Shake from thy soul these dreams effeminate,
These passions born of indolence and ease.
Resolve, and thou art free.  But breathe the air
Of mountains, and their unapproachable summits
Will lift thee to the level of themselves.

EPIMETHEUS.
The roar of forests and of waterfalls,
The rushing of a mighty wind, with loud
And undistinguishable voices calling,
Are in my ear!

PROMETHEUS.
O, listen and obey.

EPIMETHEUS.
Thou leadest me as a child, I follow thee.

(They go out.)

CHORUS OF OREADES.
Centuries old are the mountains;
Their foreheads wrinkled and rifted
Helios crowns by day,
Pallid Selene by night;
From their bosoms uptossed
The snows are driven and drifted,
Like Tithonus' beard
Streaming dishevelled and white.

Thunder and tempest of wind
Their trumpets blow in the vastness;
Phantoms of mist and rain,
Cloud and the shadow of cloud,
Pass and repass by the gates
Of their inaccessible fastness;
Ever unmoved they stand,
Solemn, eternal, and proud,

VOICES OF THE WATERS.
Flooded by rain and snow
In their inexhaustible sources,
Swollen by affluent streams
Hurrying onward and hurled
Headlong over the crags,
The impetuous water-courses,
Rush and roar and plunge
Down to the nethermost world.

Say, have the solid rocks
Into streams of silver been melted,
Flowing over the plains,
Spreading to lakes in the fields?
Or have the mountains, the giants,
The ice-helmed, the forest-belted,
Scattered their arms abroad;
Flung in the meadows their shields?

VOICES OF THE WINDS.
High on their turreted cliffs
That bolts of thunder have shattered,
Storm-winds muster and blow
Trumpets of terrible breath;
Then from the gateways rush,
And before them routed and scattered
Sullen the cloud-rack flies,
Pale with the pallor of death.

Onward the hurricane rides,
And flee for shelter the shepherds;
White are the frightened leaves,
Harvests with terror are white;
Panic seizes the herds,
And even the lions and leopards,
Prowling no longer for prey,
Crouch in their caverns with fright.

VOICES OF THE FOREST.
Guarding the mountains around
Majestic the forests are standing,
Bright are their crested helms,
Dark is their armor of leaves;
Filled with the breath of freedom
Each bosom subsiding, expanding,
Now like the ocean sinks,
Now like the ocean upheaves.

Planted firm on the rock,
With foreheads stern and defiant,
Loud they shout to the winds,
Loud to the tempest they call;
Naught but Olympian thunders,
That blasted Titan and Giant,
Them can uproot and o'erthrow,
Shaking the earth with their fall.

CHORUS OF OREADES.
These are the Voices Three
Of winds and forests and fountains,
Voices of earth and of air,
Murmur and rushing of streams,
Making together one sound,
The mysterious voice of the mountains,
Waking the sluggard that sleeps,
Waking the dreamer of dreams.

These are the Voices Three,
That speak of endless endeavor,
Speak of endurance and strength,
Triumph and fulness of fame,
Sounding about the world,
An inspiration forever,
Stirring the hearts of men,
Shaping their end and their aim.


VII

THE HOUSE OF EPIMETHEUS

PANDORA.
Left to myself I wander as I will,
And as my fancy leads me, through this house,
Nor could I ask a dwelling more complete
Were I indeed the Goddess that he deems me.
No mansion of Olympus, framed to be
The habitation of the Immortal Gods,
Can be more beautiful.  And this is mine
And more than this, the love wherewith he crowns me.
As if impelled by powers invisible
And irresistible, my steps return
Unto this spacious hall.  All corridors
And passages lead hither, and all doors
But open into it.  Yon mysterious chest
Attracts and fascinates me.  Would I knew
What there lies hidden!  But the oracle
Forbids.  Ah me!  The secret then is safe.
So would it be if it were in my keeping.
A crowd of shadowy faces from the mirrors
That line these walls are watching me.  I dare not
Lift up the lid.  A hundred times the act
Would be repeated, and the secret seen
By twice a hundred incorporeal eyes.

(She walks to the other side of the hall.)

My feet are weary, wandering to and fro,
My eyes with seeing and my heart with waiting.
I will lie here and rest till he returns,
Who is my dawn, my day, my Helios.

(Throws herself upon a couch, and falls asleep.)

ZEPHYRUS.
Come from thy caverns dark and deep.
O son of Erebus and Night;
All sense of hearing and of sight
Enfold in the serene delight
And quietude of sleep!

Set all the silent sentinels
To bar and guard the Ivory Gate,
And keep the evil dreams of fate
And falsehood and infernal hate
Imprisoned in their cells.

But open wide the Gate of Horn,
Whence, beautiful as planets, rise
The dreams of truth, with starry eyes,
And all the wondrous prophecies
And visions of the morn.

CHORUS OF DREAMS FROM THE IVORY GATE.
   Ye sentinels of sleep,
   It is in vain ye keep
Your drowsy watch before the Ivory Gate;
   Though closed the portal seems,
   The airy feet of dreams
Ye cannot thus in walls incarcerate.

   We phantoms are and dreams
   Born by Tartarean streams,
As ministers of the infernal powers;
   O son of Erebus
   And Night, behold! we thus
Elude your watchful warders on the towers!

   From gloomy Tartarus
   The Fates have summoned us
To whisper in her ear, who lies asleep,
   A tale to fan the fire
   Of her insane desire
To know a secret that the Gods would keep.

   This passion, in their ire,
   The Gods themselves inspire,
To vex mankind with evils manifold,
   So that disease and pain
   O'er the whole earth may reign,
And nevermore return the Age of Gold.

PANDORA (waking).
A voice said in my sleep: "Do not delay:
Do not delay; the golden moments fly!
The oracle hath forbidden; yet not thee
Doth it forbid, but Epimetheus only!"
I am alone.  These faces in the mirrors
Are but the shadows and phantoms of myself;
They cannot help nor hinder.  No one sees me,
Save the all-seeing Gods, who, knowing good
And knowing evil, have created me
Such as I am, and filled me with desire
Of knowing good and evil like themselves.

(She approaches the chest.)

I hesitate no longer.  Weal or woe,
Or life or death, the moment shall decide.

(She lifts the lid.  A dense mist rises from
the chest, and fills the room.  PANDORA
falls senseless on the floor.  Storm without.)

CHORUS OF DREAMS FROM THE GATE OF HORN.
Yes, the moment shall decide!
It already hath decided;
And the secret once confided
To the keeping of the Titan
Now is flying far and wide,
Whispered, told on every side,
To disquiet and to frighten.

Fever of the heart and brain,
Sorrow, pestilence, and pain,
Moans of anguish, maniac laughter,
All the evils that hereafter
Shall afflict and vex mankind,
All into the air have risen
From the chambers of their prison;
Only Hope remains behind.


VIII

IN THE GARDEN

EPIMETHEUS.
The storm is past, but it hath left behind it
Ruin and desolation.  All the walks
Are strewn with shattered boughs; the birds are silent;
The flowers, downtrodden by the wind, lie dead;
The swollen rivulet sobs with secret pain,
The melancholy reeds whisper together
As if some dreadful deed had been committed
They dare not name, and all the air is heavy
With an unspoken sorrow!  Premonitions,
Foreshadowings of some terrible disaster
Oppress my heart.  Ye Gods, avert the omen!

PANDORA (coming from the house).
O Epimetheus, I no longer dare
To lift mine eyes to thine, nor hear thy voice,
Being no longer worthy of thy love.

EPIMETHEUS.
What hast thou done?

PANDORA.
Forgive me not, but kill me.

EPIMETHEUS.
What hast thou done?

PANDORA.
I pray for death, not pardon.

EPIMETHEUS.
What hast thou done?

PANDORA.
I dare not speak of it.

EPIMETHEUS.
Thy pallor and thy silence terrify me!

PANDORA.
I have brought wrath and ruin on thy house!
My heart hath braved the oracle that guarded
The fatal secret from us, and my hand
Lifted the lid of the mysterious chest!

EPIMETHEUS.
Then all is lost!  I am indeed undone.

PANDORA.
I pray for punishment, and not for pardon.

EPIMETHEUS.
Mine is the fault not thine.  On me shall fall
The vengeance of the Gods, for I betrayed
Their secret when, in evil hour, I said
It was a secret; when, in evil hour,
I left thee here alone to this temptation.
Why did I leave thee?

PANDORA.
Why didst thou return?
Eternal absence would have been to me
The greatest punishment.  To be left alone
And face to face with my own crime, had been
Just retribution.  Upon me, ye Gods,
Let all your vengeance fall!

EPIMETHEUS.
On thee and me.
I do not love thee less for what is done,
And cannot be undone.  Thy very weakness
Hath brought thee nearer to me, and henceforth
My love will have a sense of pity in it,
Making it less a worship than before.

PANDORA.
Pity me not; pity is degradation.
Love me and kill me.

EPIMETHEUS.
Beautiful Pandora!
Thou art a Goddess still!

PANDORA.
I am a woman;
And the insurgent demon in my nature,
That made me brave the oracle, revolts
At pity and compassion.  Let me die;
What else remains for me?

EPIMETHEUS.
Youth, hope, and love:
To build a new life on a ruined life,
To make the future fairer than the past,
And make the past appear a troubled dream.
Even now in passing through the garden walks
Upon the ground I saw a fallen nest
Ruined and full of rain; and over me
Beheld the uncomplaining birds already
Busy in building a new habitation.

PANDORA.
Auspicious omen!

EPIMETHEUS.
May the Eumenides
Put out their torches and behold us not,
And fling away their whips of scorpions
And touch us not.

PANDORA.
Me let them punish.
Only through punishment of our evil deeds,
Only through suffering, are we reconciled
To the immortal Gods and to ourselves.


CHORUS OF THE EUMENIDES.
   Never shall souls like these
   Escape the Eumenides,
The daughters dark of Acheron and Night!
   Unquenched our torches glare,
   Our scourges in the air
Send forth prophetic sounds before they smite.

   Never by lapse of time
   The soul defaced by crime
Into its former self returns again;
   For every guilty deed
   Holds in itself the seed
Of retribution and undying pain.

   Never shall be the loss
   Restored, till Helios
Hath purified them with his heavenly fires;
   Then what was lost is won,
   And the new life begun,
Kindled with nobler passions and desires.



THE HANGING OF THE CRANE

I


The lights are out, and gone are all the guests
That thronging came with merriment and jests
  To celebrate the Hanging of the Crane
In the new house,--into the night are gone;
But still the fire upon the hearth burns on,
    And I alone remain.

  O fortunate, O happy day,
  When a new household finds its place
  Among the myriad homes of earth,
  Like a new star just sprung to birth,
  And rolled on its harmonious way
  Into the boundless realms of space!

So said the guests in speech and song,
As in the chimney, burning bright,
We hung the iron crane to-night,
And merry was the feast and long.


II

And now I sit and muse on what may be,
And in my vision see, or seem to see,
  Through floating vapors interfused with light,
Shapes indeterminate, that gleam and fade,
As shadows passing into deeper shade
    Sink and elude the sight.

For two alone, there in the hall,
As spread the table round and small;
Upon the polished silver shine
The evening lamps, but, more divine,
The light of love shines over all;
Of love, that says not mine and thine,
But ours, for ours is thine and mine.

They want no guests, to come between
Their tender glances like a screen,
And tell them tales of land and sea,
And whatsoever may betide
The great, forgotten world outside;
They want no guests; they needs must be
Each other's own best company.


III

The picture fades; as at a village fair
A showman's views, dissolving into air,
  Again appear transfigured on the screen,
So in my fancy this; and now once more,
In part transfigured, through the open door
  Appears the selfsame scene.

Seated, I see the two again,
But not alone; they entertain
A little angel unaware,
With face as round as is the moon;
A royal guest with flaxen hair,
Who, throned upon his lofty chair,
Drums on the table with his spoon,
Then drops it careless on the floor,
To grasp at things unseen before.

Are these celestial manners? these
The ways that win, the arts that please?
Ah yes; consider well the guest,
And whatsoe'er he does seems best;
He ruleth by the right divine
Of helplessness, so lately born
In purple chambers of the morn,
As sovereign over thee and thine.
He speaketh not; and yet there lies
A conversation in his eyes;
The golden silence of the Greek,
The gravest wisdom of the wise,
Not spoken in language, but in looks
More legible than printed books,
As if he could but would not speak.
And now, O monarch absolute,
Thy power is put to proof; for, lo!
Resistless, fathomless, and slow,
The nurse comes rustling like the sea,
And pushes back thy chair and thee,
And so good night to King Canute.


IV

As one who walking in a forest sees
A lovely landscape through the parted frees,
  Then sees it not, for boughs that intervene
Or as we see the moon sometimes revealed
Through drifting clouds, and then again concealed,
    So I behold the scene.

There are two guests at table now;
The king, deposed and older grown,
No longer occupies the throne,--
The crown is on his sister's brow;
A Princess from the Fairy Isles,
The very pattern girl of girls.
All covered and embowered in curls,
Rose-tinted from the Isle of Flowers,
And sailing with soft, silken sails
From far-off Dreamland into ours.
Above their bowls with rims of blue
Four azure eyes of deeper hue
Are looking, dreamy with delight;
Limpid as planets that emerge
Above the ocean's rounded verge,
Soft-shining through the summer night.
Steadfast they gaze, yet nothing see
Beyond the horizon of their bowls;
Nor care they for the world that rolls
With all its freight of troubled souls
Into the days that are to be.


V

Again the tossing boughs shut out the scene,
Again the drifting vapors intervene,
  And the moon's pallid disk is hidden quite;
And now I see the table wider grown,
As round a pebble into water thrown
    Dilates a ring of light.

I see the table wider grown,
I see it garlanded with guests,
As if fair Ariadne's Crown
Out of the sky had fallen down;
Maidens within whose tender breasts
A thousand restless hopes and fears,
Forth reaching to the coming years,
Flutter awhile, then quiet lie
Like timid birds that fain would fly,
But do not dare to leave their nests;--
And youths, who in their strength elate
Challenge the van and front of fate,
Eager as champions to be
In the divine knight-errantry
Of youth, that travels sea and land
Seeking adventures, or pursues,
Through cities, and through solitudes
Frequented by the lyric Muse,
The phantom with the beckoning hand,
That still allures and still eludes.
O sweet illusions of the brain!
O sudden thrills of fire and frost!
The world is bright while ye remain,
And dark and dead when ye are lost!


VI

The meadow-brook, that seemeth to stand still,
Quickens its current as it nears the mill;
  And so the stream of Time that lingereth
In level places, and so dull appears,
Runs with a swifter current as it nears
    The gloomy mills of Death.

And now, like the magician's scroll,
That in the owner's keeping shrinks
With every wish he speaks or thinks,
Till the last wish consumes the whole,
The table dwindles, and again
I see the two alone remain.
The crown of stars is broken in parts;
Its jewels, brighter than the day,
Have one by one been stolen away
To shine in other homes and hearts.
One is a wanderer now afar
In Ceylon or in Zanzibar,
Or sunny regions of Cathay;
And one is in the boisterous camp
Mid clink of arms and horses' tramp,
And battle's terrible array.
I see the patient mother read,
With aching heart, of wrecks that float
Disabled on those seas remote,
Or of some great heroic deed
On battle-fields where thousands bleed
To lift one hero into fame.
Anxious she bends her graceful head
Above these chronicles of pain,
And trembles with a secret dread
Lest there among the drowned or slain
She find the one beloved name.


VII

After a day of cloud and wind and rain
Sometimes the setting sun breaks out again,
  And touching all the darksome woods with light,
Smiles on the fields, until they laugh and sing,
Then like a ruby from the horizon's ring
    Drops down into the night.

What see I now?  The night is fair,
The storm of grief, the clouds of care,
The wind, the rain, have passed away;
The lamps are lit, the fires burn bright,
The house is full of life and light:
It is the Golden Wedding day.
The guests come thronging in once more,
Quick footsteps sound along the floor,
The trooping children crowd the stair,
And in and out and everywhere
Flashes along the corridor
The sunshine of their golden hair.
On the round table in the hall
Another Ariadne's Crown
Out of the sky hath fallen down;
More than one Monarch of the Moon
Is drumming with his silver spoon;
The light of love shines over all.

O fortunate, O happy day!
The people sing, the people say.
The ancient bridegroom and the bride,
Smiling contented and serene
Upon the blithe, bewildering scene,
Behold, well pleased, on every side
Their forms and features multiplied,
As the reflection of a light
Between two burnished mirrors gleams,
Or lamps upon a bridge at night
Stretch on and on before the sight,
Till the long vista endless seems.



MORITURI SALUTAMUS

POEM FOR THE FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE CLASS OF 1825
IN BOWDOIN COLLEGE

Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
Et fugiunt freno non remorante dies.--OVID, Fastorum, Lib. vi.


"O Caesar, we who are about to die
Salute you!" was the gladiators' cry
In the arena, standing face to face
With death and with the Roman populace.

O ye familiar scenes,--ye groves of pine,
That once were mine and are no longer mine,--
Thou river, widening through the meadows green
To the vast sea, so near and yet unseen,--
Ye halls, in whose seclusion and repose
Phantoms of fame, like exhalations, rose
And vanished,--we who are about to die
Salute you; earth and air and sea and sky,
And the Imperial Sun that scatters down
His sovereign splendors upon grove and town.

Ye do not answer us! ye do not hear!
We are forgotten; and in your austere
And calm indifference, ye little care
Whether we come or go, or whence or where.
What passing generations fill these halls,
What passing voices echo front these walls,
Ye heed not; we are only as the blast,
A moment heard, and then forever past.

Not so the teachers who in earlier days
Led our bewildered feet through learning's maze;
They answer us--alas! what have I said?
What greetings come there from the voiceless dead?
What salutation, welcome, or reply?
What pressure from the hands that lifeless lie?
They are no longer here; they all are gone
Into the land of shadows,--all save one.
Honor and reverence, and the good repute
That follows faithful service as its fruit,
Be unto him, whom living we salute.

The great Italian poet, when he made
His dreadful journey to the realms of shade,
Met there the old instructor of his youth,
And cried in tones of pity and of ruth:
"O, never from the memory of my heart
Your dear, paternal image shall depart,
Who while on earth, ere yet by death surprised,
Taught me how mortals are immortalized;
How grateful am I for that patient care
All my life long my language shall declare."

To-day we make the poet's words our own
And utter them in plaintive undertone;
Nor to the living only be they said,
But to the other living called the dead,
Whose dear, paternal images appear
Not wrapped in gloom, but robed in sunshine here;
Whose simple lives, complete and without flaw,
Were part and parcel of great Nature's law;
Who said not to their Lord, as if afraid
"Here is thy talent in a napkin laid,"
But labored in their sphere, as men who live
In the delight that work alone can give.
Peace be to them; eternal peace and rest,
And the fulfilment of the great behest:
"Ye have been faithful over a few things,
Over ten cities shall ye reign as kings."

And ye who fill the places we once filled,
And follow in the furrows that we tilled,
Young men, whose generous hearts are beating high,
We who are old, and are about to die,
Salute you; hail you; take your hands in ours,
And crown you with our welcome as with flowers!
How beautiful is youth! how bright it gleams
With its illusions, aspirations, dreams!
Book of Beginnings, Story without End,
Each maid a heroine, and each man a friend!
Aladdin's Lamp, and Fortunatus' Purse,
That holds the treasures of the universe!
All possibilities are in its hands,
No danger daunts it, and no foe withstands;
In its sublime audacity of faith,
"Be thou removed!" it to the mountain saith,
And with ambitious feet, secure and proud,
Ascends the ladder leaning on the cloud!

As ancient Priam at the Scaean gate
Sat on the walls of Troy in regal state
With the old men, too old and weak to fight,
Chirping like grasshoppers in their delight
To see the embattled hosts, with spear and shield,
Of Trojans and Achaians in the field;
So from the snowy summits of our years
We see you in the plain, as each appears,
And question of you; asking, "Who is he
That towers above the others?  Which may be
Atreides, Menelaus, Odysseus,
Ajax the great, or bold Idomeneus?"

Let him not boast who puts his armor on
As he who puts it off, the battle done.
Study yourselves; and most of all note well
Wherein kind Nature meant you to excel.
Not every blossom ripens into fruit;
Minerva, the inventress of the flute,
Flung it aside, when she her face surveyed
Distorted in a fountain as she played;
The unlucky Marsyas found it, and his fate
Was one to make the bravest hesitate.

Write on your doors the saying wise and old,
"Be bold! be bold!" and everywhere--"Be bold;
Be not too bold!"  Yet better the excess
Than the defect; better the more than less;
Better like Hector in the field to die,
Than like a perfumed Paris turn and fly,

And now, my classmates; ye remaining few
That number not the half of those we knew,
Ye, against whose familiar names not yet
The fatal asterisk of death is set,
Ye I salute!  The horologe of Time
Strikes the half-century with a solemn chime,
And summons us together once again,
The joy of meeting not unmixed with pain.

Where are the others?  Voices from the deep
Caverns of darkness answer me: "They sleep!"
I name no names; instinctively I feel
Each at some well-remembered grave will kneel,
And from the inscription wipe the weeds and moss,
For every heart best knoweth its own loss.
I see their scattered gravestones gleaming white
Through the pale dusk of the impending night;
O'er all alike the impartial sunset throws
Its golden lilies mingled with the rose;
We give to each a tender thought, and pass
Out of the graveyards with their tangled grass,
Unto these scenes frequented by our feet
When we were young, and life was fresh and sweet.

What shall I say to you?  What can I say
Better than silence is?  When I survey
This throng of faces turned to meet my own,
Friendly and fair, and yet to me unknown,
Transformed the very landscape seems to be;
It is the same, yet not the same to me.
So many memories crowd upon my brain,
So many ghosts are in the wooded plain,
I fain would steal away, with noiseless tread,
As from a house where some one lieth dead.
I cannot go;--I pause;--I hesitate;
My feet reluctant linger at the gate;
As one who struggles in a troubled dream
To speak and cannot, to myself I seem.

Vanish the dream! Vanish the idle fears!
Vanish the rolling mists of fifty years!
Whatever time or space may intervene,
I will not be a stranger in this scene.
Here every doubt, all indecision, ends;
Hail, my companions, comrades, classmates, friends!

Ah me! the fifty years since last we met
Seem to me fifty folios bound and set
By Time, the great transcriber, on his shelves,
Wherein are written the histories of ourselves.
What tragedies, what comedies, are there;
What joy and grief, what rapture and despair!
What chronicles of triumph and defeat,
Of struggle, and temptation, and retreat!
What records of regrets, and doubts, and fears
What pages blotted, blistered by our tears!
What lovely landscapes on the margin shine,
What sweet, angelic faces, what divine
And holy images of love and trust,
Undimmed by age, unsoiled by damp or dust!

Whose hand shall dare to open and explore
These volumes, closed and clasped forevermore?
Not mine.  With reverential feet I pass;
I hear a voice that cries, "Alas! alas!
Whatever hath been written shall remain,
Nor be erased nor written o'er again;
The unwritten only still belongs to thee:
Take heed, and ponder well what that shall be."

As children frightened by a thundercloud
Are reassured if some one reads aloud
A tale of wonder, with enchantment fraught,
Or wild adventure, that diverts their thought,
Let me endeavor with a tale to chase
The gathering shadows of the time and place,
And banish what we all too deeply feel
Wholly to say, or wholly to conceal.

In mediaeval Rome, I know not where,
There stood an image with its arm in air,
And on its lifted finger, shining clear,
A golden ring with the device, "Strike here!"
Greatly the people wondered, though none guessed
The meaning that these words but half expressed,
Until a learned clerk, who at noonday
With downcast eyes was passing on his way,
Paused, and observed the spot, and marked it well,
Whereon the shadow of the finger fell;
And, coming back at midnight, delved, and found
A secret stairway leading under ground.
Down this he passed into a spacious hall,
Lit by a flaming jewel on the wall;
And opposite in threatening attitude
With bow and shaft a brazen statue stood.
Upon its forehead, like a coronet,
Were these mysterious words of menace set:
"That which I am, I am; my fatal aim
None can escape, not even yon luminous flame!"

Midway the hall was a fair table placed,
With cloth of gold, and golden cups enchased
With rubies, and the plates and knives were gold,
And gold the bread and viands manifold.
Around it, silent, motionless, and sad,
Were seated gallant knights in armor clad,
And ladies beautiful with plume and zone,
But they were stone, their hearts within were stone;
And the vast hall was filled in every part
With silent crowds, stony in face and heart.

Long at the scene, bewildered and amazed
The trembling clerk in speechless wonder gazed;
Then from the table, by his greed made bold,
He seized a goblet and a knife of gold,
And suddenly from their seats the guests upsprang,
The vaulted ceiling with loud clamors rang,
The archer sped his arrow, at their call,
Shattering the lambent jewel on the wall,
And all was dark around and overhead;--
Stark on the door the luckless clerk lay dead!

The writer of this legend then records
Its ghostly application in these words:
The image is the Adversary old,
Whose beckoning finger points to realms of gold;
Our lusts and passions are the downward stair
That leads the soul from a diviner air;
The archer, Death; the flaming jewel, Life;
Terrestrial goods, the goblet and the knife;
The knights and ladies, all whose flesh and bone
By avarice have been hardened into stone;
The clerk, the scholar whom the love of pelf
Tempts from his books and from his nobler self.

The scholar and the world!  The endless strife,
The discord in the harmonies of life!
The love of learning, the sequestered nooks,
And all the sweet serenity of books;
The market-place, the eager love of gain,
Whose aim is vanity, and whose end is pain!

But why, you ask me, should this tale be told
To men grown old, or who are growing old?
It is too late!  Ah, nothing is too late
Till the tired heart shall cease to palpitate.
Cato learned Greek at eighty; Sophocles
Wrote his grand Oedipus, and Simonides
Bore off the prize of verse from his compeers,
When each had numbered more than fourscore years,
And Theophrastus, at fourscore and ten,
Had but begun his Characters of Men.
Chaucer, at Woodstock with the nightingales,
At sixty wrote the Canterbury Tales;
Goethe at Weimar, toiling to the last,
Completed Faust when eighty years were past.
These are indeed exceptions; but they show
How far the gulf-stream of our youth may flow
Into the arctic regions of our lives.
Where little else than life itself survives.

As the barometer foretells the storm
While still the skies are clear, the weather warm,
So something in us, as old age draws near,
Betrays the pressure of the atmosphere.
The nimble mercury, ere we are aware,
Descends the elastic ladder of the air;
The telltale blood in artery and vein
Sinks from its higher levels in the brain;
Whatever poet, orator, or sage
May say of it, old age is still old age.
It is the waning, not the crescent moon;
The dusk of evening, not the blaze of noon:
It is not strength, but weakness; not desire,
But its surcease; not the fierce heat of fire,
The burning and consuming element,
But that of ashes and of embers spent,
In which some living sparks we still discern,
Enough to warm, but not enough to burn.

What then?  Shall we sit idly down and say
The night hath come; it is no longer day?
The night hath not yet come; we are not quite
Cut off from labor by the failing light;
Something remains for us to do or dare;
Even the oldest tree some fruit may bear;
Not Oedipus Coloneus, or Greek Ode,
Or tales of pilgrims that one morning rode
Out of the gateway of the Tabard inn,
But other something, would we but begin;
For age is opportunity no less
Than youth itself, though in another dress,
And as the evening twilight fades away
The sky is filled with stars, invisible by day.



A BOOK OF SONNETS

THREE FRIENDS OF MINE

I

When I remember them, those friends of mine,
  Who are no longer here, the noble three,
  Who half my life were more than friends to me,
  And whose discourse was like a generous wine,
I most of all remember the divine
  Something, that shone in them, and made us see
  The archetypal man, and what might be
  The amplitude of Nature's first design.
In vain I stretch my hands to clasp their hands;
  I cannot find them.  Nothing now is left
  But a majestic memory.  They meanwhile
Wander together in Elysian lands,
  Perchance remembering me, who am bereft
  Of their dear presence, and, remembering, smile.


II

In Attica thy birthplace should have been,
  Or the Ionian Isles, or where the seas
  Encircle in their arms the Cyclades,
  So wholly Greek wast thou in thy serene
And childlike joy of life, O Philhellene!
  Around thee would have swarmed the Attic bees;
  Homer had been thy friend, or Socrates,
  And Plato welcomed thee to his demesne.
For thee old legends breathed historic breath;
  Thou sawest Poseidon in the purple sea,
  And in the sunset Jason's fleece of gold!
O, what hadst thou to do with cruel Death,
  Who wast so full of life, or Death with thee,
  That thou shouldst die before thou hadst grown old!


III

I stand again on the familiar shore,
  And hear the waves of the distracted sea
  Piteously calling and lamenting thee,
  And waiting restless at thy cottage door.
The rocks, the sea-weed on the ocean floor,
  The willows in the meadow, and the free
  Wild winds of the Atlantic welcome me;
  Then why shouldst thou be dead, and come no more?
Ah, why shouldst thou be dead, when common men
  Are busy with their trivial affairs,
  Having and holding?  Why, when thou hadst read
Nature's mysterious manuscript, and then
  Wast ready to reveal the truth it bears,
  Why art thou silent!  Why shouldst thou be dead?


IV

River, that stealest with such silent pace
  Around the City of the Dead, where lies
  A friend who bore thy name, and whom these eyes
  Shall see no more in his accustomed place,
Linger and fold him in thy soft embrace
  And say good night, for now the western skies
  Are red with sunset, and gray mists arise
  Like damps that gather on a dead man's face.
Good night! good night! as we so oft have said
  Beneath this roof at midnight in the days
  That are no more, and shall no more return.
Thou hast but taken thy lamp and gone to bed;
  I stay a little longer, as one stays
  To cover up the embers that still burn.


V

The doors are all wide open; at the gate
  The blossomed lilacs counterfeit a blaze,
  And seem to warm the air; a dreamy haze
  Hangs o'er the Brighton meadows like a fate,
And on their margin, with sea-tides elate,
  The flooded Charles, as in the happier days,
  Writes the last letter of his name, and stays
  His restless steps, as if compelled to wait.
I also wait; but they will come no more,
  Those friends of mine, whose presence satisfied
  The thirst and hunger of my heart.  Ah me!
They have forgotten the pathway to my door!
  Something is gone from nature since they died,
  And summer is not summer, nor can be.



CHAUCER

An old man in a lodge within a park;
  The chamber walls depicted all around
  With portraitures of huntsman, hawk, and hound.
  And the hurt deer.  He listeneth to the lark,
Whose song comes with the sunshine through the dark
  Of painted glass in leaden lattice bound;
  He listeneth and he laugheth at the sound,
  Then writeth in a book like any clerk.
He is the poet of the dawn, who wrote
  The Canterbury Tales, and his old age
  Made beautiful with song; and as I read
I hear the crowing cock, I hear the note
  Of lark and linnet, and from every page
  Rise odors of ploughed field or flowery mead.



SHAKESPEARE

A vision as of crowded city streets,
  With human life in endless overflow;
  Thunder of thoroughfares; trumpets that blow
  To battle; clamor, in obscure retreats,
Of sailors landed from their anchored fleets;
  Tolling of bells in turrets, and below
  Voices of children, and bright flowers that throw
  O'er garden-walls their intermingled sweets!
This vision comes to me when I unfold
  The volume of the Poet paramount,
  Whom all the Muses loved, not one alone;--
Into his hands they put the lyre of gold,
  And, crowned with sacred laurel at their fount,
  Placed him as Musagetes on their throne.



MILTON

I pace the sounding sea-beach and behold
  How the voluminous billows roll and run,
  Upheaving and subsiding, while the sun
  Shines through their sheeted emerald far unrolled,
And the ninth wave, slow gathering fold by fold
  All its loose-flowing garments into one,
  Plunges upon the shore, and floods the dun
  Pale reach of sands, and changes them to gold.
So in majestic cadence rise and fall
  The mighty undulations of thy song,
  O sightless bard, England's Maeonides!
And ever and anon, high over all
  Uplifted, a ninth wave superb and strong,
  Floods all the soul with its melodious seas.



KEATS

The young Endymion sleeps Endymion's sleep;
  The shepherd-boy whose tale was left half told!
  The solemn grove uplifts its shield of gold
  To the red rising moon, and loud and deep
The nightingale is singing from the steep;
  It is midsummer, but the air is cold;
  Can it be death?  Alas, beside the fold
  A shepherd's pipe lies shattered near his sheep.
Lo! in the moonlight gleams a marble white,
  On which I read: "Here lieth one whose name
  Was writ in water."  And was this the meed
Of his sweet singing?  Rather let me write:
  "The smoking flax before it burst to flame
  Was quenched by death, and broken the bruised reed."



THE GALAXY

Torrent of light and river of the air,
  Along whose bed the glimmering stars are seen
  Like gold and silver sands in some ravine
  Where mountain streams have left their channels bare!
The Spaniard sees in thee the pathway, where
  His patron saint descended in the sheen
  Of his celestial armor, on serene
  And quiet nights, when all the heavens were fair.
Not this I see, nor yet the ancient fable
  Of Phaeton's wild course, that scorched the skies
  Where'er the hoofs of his hot coursers trod;
But the white drift of worlds o'er chasms of sable,
  The star-dust that is whirled aloft and flies
  From the invisible chariot-wheels of God.



THE SOUND OF THE SEA

The sea awoke at midnight from its sleep,
  And round the pebbly beaches far and wide
  I heard the first wave of the rising tide
  Rush onward with uninterrupted sweep;
A voice out of the silence of the deep,
  A sound mysteriously multiplied
  As of a cataract from the mountain's side,
  Or roar of winds upon a wooded steep.
So comes to us at times, from the unknown
  And inaccessible solitudes of being,
  The rushing of the sea-tides of the soul;
And inspirations, that we deem our own,
  Are some divine foreshadowing and foreseeing
  Of things beyond our reason or control.



A SUMMER DAY BY THE SEA

The sun is set; and in his latest beams
  Yon little cloud of ashen gray and gold,
  Slowly upon the amber air unrolled,
  The falling mantle of the Prophet seems.
From the dim headlands many a lighthouse gleams,
  The street-lamps of the ocean; and behold,
  O'erhead the banners of the night unfold;
  The day hath passed into the land of dreams.
O summer day beside the joyous sea!
  O summer day so wonderful and white,
  So full of gladness and so full of pain!
Forever and forever shalt thou be
  To some the gravestone of a dead delight,
  To some the landmark of a new domain.



THE TIDES

I saw the long line of the vacant shore,
  The sea-weed and the shells upon the sand,
  And the brown rocks left bare on every hand,
  As if the ebbing tide would flow no more.
Then heard I, more distinctly than before,
  The ocean breathe and its great breast expand,
  And hurrying came on the defenceless land
  The insurgent waters with tumultuous roar.
All thought and feeling and desire, I said,
  Love, laughter, and the exultant joy of song
  Have ebbed from me forever!  Suddenly o'er me
They swept again from their deep ocean bed,
  And in a tumult of delight, and strong
  As youth, and beautiful as youth, upbore me.



A SHADOW

I said unto myself, if I were dead,
  What would befall these children?  What would be
  Their fate, who now are looking up to me
  For help and furtherance?  Their lives, I said,
Would be a volume wherein I have read
  But the first chapters, and no longer see
  To read the rest of their dear history,
  So full of beauty and so full of dread.
Be comforted; the world is very old,
  And generations pass, as they have passed,
  A troop of shadows moving with the sun;
Thousands of times has the old tale been told;
  The world belongs to those who come the last,
  They will find hope and strength as we have done.



A NAMELESS GRAVE

"A soldier of the Union mustered out,"
  Is the inscription on an unknown grave
  At Newport News, beside the salt-sea wave,
  Nameless and dateless; sentinel or scout
Shot down in skirmish, or disastrous rout
  Of battle, when the loud artillery drave
  Its iron wedges through the ranks of brave
  And doomed battalions, storming the redoubt.
Thou unknown hero sleeping by the sea
  In thy forgotten grave! with secret shame
  I feel my pulses beat, my forehead burn,
When I remember thou hast given for me
  All that thou hadst, thy life, thy very name,
  And I can give thee nothing in return.



SLEEP

Lull me to sleep, ye winds, whose fitful sound
  Seems from some faint Aeolian harp-string caught;
  Seal up the hundred wakeful eyes of thought
  As Hermes with his lyre in sleep profound
The hundred wakeful eyes of Argus bound;
  For I am weary, and am overwrought
  With too much toil, with too much care distraught,
  And with the iron crown of anguish crowned.
Lay thy soft hand upon my brow and cheek,
  O peaceful Sleep! until from pain released
  I breathe again uninterrupted breath!
Ah, with what subtile meaning did the Greek
  Call thee the lesser mystery at the feast
  Whereof the greater mystery is death!



THE OLD BRIDGE AT FLORENCE

Taddeo Gaddi built me.  I am old,
  Five centuries old.  I plant my foot of stone
  Upon the Arno, as St. Michael's own
  Was planted on the dragon.  Fold by fold
Beneath me as it struggles.  I behold
  Its glistening scales.  Twice hath it overthrown
  My kindred and companions.  Me alone
  It moveth not, but is by me controlled,
I can remember when the Medici
  Were driven from Florence; longer still ago
  The final wars of Ghibelline and Guelf.
Florence adorns me with her jewelry;
  And when I think that Michael Angelo
  Hath leaned on me, I glory in myself.



IL PONTE VECCHIO DI FIRENZE

Gaddi mi fece; il Ponte Vecchio sono;
  Cinquecent' anni gia sull' Arno pianto
  Il piede, come il suo Michele Santo
  Pianto sul draco.  Mentre ch' io ragiono
Lo vedo torcere con flebil suono
  Le rilucenti scaglie.  Ha questi affranto
  Due volte i miei maggior.  Me solo intanto
  Neppure muove, ed io non l' abbandono.
Io mi rammento quando fur cacciati
  I Medici; pur quando Ghibellino
  E Guelfo fecer pace mi rammento.
Fiorenza i suoi giojelli m' ha prestati;
  E quando penso ch' Agnolo il divino
  Su me posava, insuperbir mi sento.



NATURE

As a fond mother, when the day is o'er,
  Leads by the hand her little child to bed,
  Half willing, half reluctant to be led,
  And leave his broken playthings on the floor,
Still gazing at them through the open door,
  Nor wholly reassured and comforted
  By promises of others in their stead,
  Which, though more splendid, may not please him more;
So Nature deals with us, and takes away
  Our playthings one by one, and by the hand
  Leads us to rest so gently, that we go
Scarce knowing if we wish to go or stay,
  Being too full of sleep to understand
  How far the unknown transcends the what we know.



IN THE CHURCHYARD AT TARRYTOWN

Here lies the gentle humorist, who died
  In the bright Indian Summer of his fame!
  A simple stone, with but a date and name,
  Marks his secluded resting-place beside
The river that he loved and glorified.
  Here in the autumn of his days he came,
  But the dry leaves of life were all aflame
  With tints that brightened and were multiplied.
How sweet a life was his; how sweet a  death!
  Living, to wing with mirth the weary hours,
  Or with romantic tales the heart to cheer;
Dying, to leave a memory like the breath
  Of summers full of sunshine and of showers,
  A grief and gladness in the atmosphere.



ELIOT'S OAK

Thou ancient oak! whose myriad leaves are loud
  With sounds of unintelligible speech,
  Sounds as of surges on a shingly beach,
  Or multitudinous murmurs of a crowd;
With some mysterious gift of tongues endowed,
  Thou speakest a different dialect to each;
  To me a language that no man can teach,
  Of a lost race, long vanished like a cloud.
For underneath thy shade, in days remote,
  Seated like Abraham at eventide
  Beneath the oaks of Mamre, the unknown
Apostle of the Indians, Eliot, wrote
  His Bible in a language that hath died
  And is forgotten, save by thee alone.



THE DESCENT OF THE MUSES

Nine sisters, beautiful in form and face,
  Came from their convent on the shining heights
  Of Pierus, the mountain of delights,
  To dwell among the people at its base.
Then seemed the world to change.  All time and space,
  Splendor of cloudless days and starry nights,
  And men and manners, and all sounds and sights,
  Had a new meaning, a diviner grace.
Proud were these sisters, but were not too proud
  To teach in schools of little country towns
  Science and song, and all the arts that please;
So that while housewives span, and farmers ploughed,
  Their comely daughters, clad in homespun gowns,
  Learned the sweet songs of the Pierides.



VENICE

White swan of cities, slumbering in thy nest
  So wonderfully built among the reeds
  Of the lagoon, that fences thee and feeds,
  As sayeth thy old historian and thy guest!
White water-lily, cradled and caressed
  By ocean streams, and from the silt and weeds
  Lifting thy golden filaments and seeds,
  Thy sun-illumined spires, thy crown and crest!
White phantom city, whose untrodden streets
  Are rivers, and whose pavements are the shifting
  Shadows of palaces and strips of sky;
I wait to see thee vanish like the fleets
  Seen in mirage, or towers of cloud uplifting
  In air their unsubstantial masonry.



THE POETS

O ye dead Poets, who are living still
  Immortal in your verse, though life be fled,
  And ye, O living Poets, who are dead
  Though ye are living, if neglect can kill,
Tell me if in the darkest hours of ill,
  With drops of anguish falling fast and red
  From the sharp crown of thorns upon your head,
  Ye were not glad your errand to fulfil?
Yes; for the gift and ministry of Song
  Have something in them so divinely sweet,
  It can assuage the bitterness of wrong;
Not in the clamor of the crowded street,
  Not in the shouts and plaudits of the throng,
  But in ourselves, are triumph and defeat.



PARKER CLEAVELAND

WRITTEN ON REVISITING BRUNSWICK IN THE SUMMER OF 1875

Among the many lives that I have known,
  None I remember more serene and sweet,
  More rounded in itself and more complete,
  Than his, who lies beneath this funeral stone.
These pines, that murmur in low monotone,
  These walks frequented by scholastic feet,
  Were all his world; but in this calm retreat
  For him the Teacher's chair became a throne.
With fond affection memory loves to dwell
  On the old days, when his example made
  A pastime of the toil of tongue and pen;
And now, amid the groves he loved so well
 That naught could lure him from their grateful shade,
 He sleeps, but wakes elsewhere, for God hath said, Amen!



THE HARVEST MOON

It is the Harvest Moon!  On gilded vanes
  And roofs of villages, on woodland crests
  And their aerial neighborhoods of nests
  Deserted, on the curtained window-panes
Of rooms where children sleep, on country lanes
  And harvest-fields, its mystic splendor rests!
  Gone are the birds that were our summer guests,
  With the last sheaves return the laboring wains!
All things are symbols: the external shows
  Of Nature have their image in the mind,
  As flowers and fruits and falling of the leaves;
The song-birds leave us at the summer's close,
  Only the empty nests are left behind,
  And pipings of the quail among the sheaves.



TO THE RIVER RHONE

Thou Royal River, born of sun and shower
  In chambers purple with the Alpine glow,
  Wrapped in the spotless ermine of the snow
  And rocked by tempests!--at the appointed hour
Forth, like a steel-clad horseman from a tower,
  With clang and clink of harness dost thou go
  To meet thy vassal torrents, that below
  Rush to receive thee and obey thy power.
And now thou movest in triumphal march,
  A king among the rivers!  On thy way
  A hundred towns await and welcome thee;
Bridges uplift for thee the stately arch,
  Vineyards encircle thee with garlands gay,
  And fleets attend thy progress to the sea!



THE THREE SILENCES OF MOLINOS

TO JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER

Three Silences there are: the first of speech,
  The second of desire, the third of thought;
  This is the lore a Spanish monk, distraught
  With dreams and visions, was the first to teach.
These Silences, commingling each with each,
  Made up the perfect Silence, that he sought
  And prayed for, and wherein at times he caught
  Mysterious sounds from realms beyond our reach.
O thou, whose daily life anticipates
  The life to come, and in whose thought and word
  The spiritual world preponderates.
Hermit of Amesbury! thou too hast heard
  Voices and melodies from beyond the gates,
  And speakest only when thy soul is stirred!



THE TWO RIVERS

I

Slowly the hour-hand of the clock moves round;
  So slowly that no human eye hath power
  To see it move!  Slowly in shine or shower
  The painted ship above it, homeward bound,
Sails, but seems motionless, as if aground;
  Yet both arrive at last; and in his tower
   The slumberous watchman wakes and strikes the hour,
   A mellow, measured, melancholy sound.
Midnight! the outpost of advancing day!
  The frontier town and citadel of night!
  The watershed of Time, from which the streams
Of Yesterday and To-morrow take their way,
  One to the land of promise and of light,
  One to the land of darkness and of dreams!

II

O River of Yesterday, with current swift
  Through chasms descending, and soon lost to sight,
  I do not care to follow in their flight
  The faded leaves, that on thy bosom drift!
O River of To-morrow, I uplift
  Mine eyes, and thee I follow, as the night
  Wanes into morning, and the dawning light
  Broadens, and all the shadows fade and shift!
I follow, follow, where thy waters run
  Through unfrequented, unfamiliar fields,
  Fragrant with flowers and musical with song;
Still follow, follow; sure to meet the sun,
  And confident, that what the future yields
  Will be the right, unless myself be wrong.

III

Yet not in vain, O River of Yesterday,
  Through chasms of darkness to the deep descending,
  I heard thee sobbing in the rain, and blending
  Thy voice with other voices far away.
I called to thee, and yet thou wouldst not stay,
  But turbulent, and with thyself contending,
  And torrent-like thy force on pebbles spending,
  Thou wouldst not listen to a poet's lay.
Thoughts, like a loud and sudden rush of wings,
  Regrets and recollections of things past,
  With hints and prophecies of things to be,
And inspirations, which, could they be things,
  And stay with us, and we could hold them fast,
  Were our good angels,--these I owe to thee.

IV

And thou, O River of To-morrow, flowing
  Between thy narrow adamantine walls,
  But beautiful, and white with waterfalls,
  And wreaths of mist, like hands the pathway showing;
I hear the trumpets of the morning blowing,
  I hear thy mighty voice, that calls and calls,
  And see, as Ossian saw in Morven's halls,
  Mysterious phantoms, coming, beckoning, going!
It is the mystery of the unknown
  That fascinates us; we are children still,
  Wayward and wistful; with one hand we cling
To the familiar things we call our own,
  And with the other, resolute of will,
  Grope in the dark for what the day will bring.



BOSTON

St. Bototlph's Town!  Hither across the plains
  And fens of Lincolnshire, in garb austere,
  There came a Saxon monk, and founded here
  A Priory, pillaged by marauding Danes,
So that thereof no vestige now remains;
  Only a name, that, spoken loud and clear,
  And echoed in another hemisphere,
  Survives the sculptured walls and painted panes.
St. Botolph's Town!  Far over leagues of land
  And leagues of sea looks forth its noble tower,
  And far around the chiming bells are heard;
So may that sacred name forever stand
  A landmark, and a symbol of the power,
  That lies concentred in a single word.



ST. JOHN'S, CAMBRIDGE

I stand beneath the tree, whose branches shade
  Thy western window, Chapel of St. John!
  And hear its leaves repeat their benison
  On him, whose hand if thy stones memorial laid;
Then I remember one of whom was said
  In the world's darkest hour, "Behold thy son!"
  And see him living still, and wandering on
  And waiting for the advent long delayed.
Not only tongues of the apostles teach
  Lessons of love and light, but these expanding
  And sheltering boughs with all their leaves implore,
And say in language clear as human speech,
  "The peace of God, that passeth understanding,
  Be and abide with you forevermore!"



MOODS

Oh that a Song would sing itself to me
  Out of the heart of Nature, or the heart
  Of man, the child of Nature, not of Art,
  Fresh as the morning, salt as the salt sea,
With just enough of bitterness to be
  A medicine to this sluggish mood, and start
  The life-blood in my veins, and so impart
  Healing and help in this dull lethargy!
Alas! not always doth the breath of song
  Breathe on us.  It is like the wind that bloweth
  At its own will, not ours, nor tarries long;
We hear the sound thereof, but no man knoweth
  From whence it comes, so sudden and swift and strong,
  Nor whither in its wayward course it goeth.



WOODSTOCK PARK

Here in a little rustic hermitage
  Alfred the Saxon King, Alfred the Great,
  Postponed the cares of king-craft to translate
  The Consolations of the Roman sage.
Here Geoffrey Chaucer in his ripe old age
  Wrote the unrivalled Tales, which soon or late
  The venturous hand that strives to imitate
  Vanquished must fall on the unfinished page.
Two kings were they, who ruled by right divine,
  And both supreme; one in the realm of Truth,
  One in the realm of Fiction and of Song.
What prince hereditary of their line,
  Uprising in the strength and flush of youth,
  Their glory shall inherit and prolong?



THE FOUR PRINCESSES AT WILNA

A PHOTOGRAPH

Sweet faces, that from pictured casements lean
  As from a castle window, looking down
  On some gay pageant passing through a town,
  Yourselves the fairest figures in the scene;
With what a gentle grace, with what serene
  Unconsciousness ye wear the triple crown
  Of youth and beauty and the fair renown
  Of a great name, that ne'er hath tarnished been!
From your soft eyes, so innocent and sweet,
  Four spirits, sweet and innocent as they,
  Gaze on the world below, the sky above;
Hark! there is some one singing in the street;
  "Faith, Hope, and Love! these three," he seems to say;
  "These three; and greatest of the three is Love."



HOLIDAYS

The holiest of all holidays are those
  Kept by ourselves in silence and apart;
  The secret anniversaries of the heart,
  When the full river of feeling overflows;--
The happy days unclouded to their close;
  The sudden joys that out of darkness start
  As flames from ashes; swift desires that dart
  Like swallows singing down each wind that blows!
White as the gleam of a receding sail,
  White as a cloud that floats and fades in air,
  White as the whitest lily on a stream,
These tender memories are;--a Fairy Tale
  Of some enchanted land we know not where,
  But lovely as a landscape in a dream.



WAPENTAKE

TO ALFRED TENNYSON

Poet! I come to touch thy lance with mine;
  Not as a knight, who on the listed field
  Of tourney touched his adversary's shield
  In token of defiance, but in sign
Of homage to the mastery, which is thine,
  In English song; nor will I keep concealed,
  And voiceless as a rivulet frost-congealed,
  My admiration for thy verse divine.
Not of the howling dervishes of song,
  Who craze the brain with their delirious dance,
  Art thou, O sweet historian of the heart!
Therefore to thee the laurel-leaves belong,
  To thee our love and our allegiance,
  For thy allegiance to the poet's art.



THE BROKEN OAR
Once upon Iceland's solitary strand
  A poet wandered with his book and pen,
  Seeking some final word, some sweet Amen,
  Wherewith to close the volume in his hand.
The billows rolled and plunged upon the sand,
  The circling sea-gulls swept beyond his ken,
  And from the parting cloud-rack now and then
  Flashed the red sunset over sea and land.
Then by the billows at his feet was tossed
  A broken oar; and carved thereon he read,
  "Oft was I weary, when I toiled at thee";
And like a man, who findeth what was lost,
  He wrote the words, then lifted up his head,
  And flung his useless pen into the sea.



THE CROSS OF SNOW

In the long, sleepless watches of the night,
  A gentle face--the face of one long dead--
  Looks at me from the wall, where round its head
  The night-lamp casts a halo of pale light.
Here in this room she died; and soul more white
  Never through martyrdom of fire was led
  To its repose; nor can in books be read
  The legend of a life more benedight.
There is a mountain in the distant West
  That, sun-defying, in its deep ravines
  Displays a cross of snow upon its side.
Such is the cross I wear upon my breast
  These eighteen years, through all the changing scenes
  And seasons, changeless since the day she died.


**************

BIRDS OF PASSAGE

FLIGHT THE FOURTH

CHARLES SUMNER

  Garlands upon his grave,
  And flowers upon his hearse,
And to the tender heart and brave
  The tribute of this verse.

  His was the troubled life,
  The conflict and the pain,
The grief, the bitterness of strife,
  The honor without stain.

  Like Winkelried, he took
  Into his manly breast
The sheaf of hostile spears, and broke
  A path for the oppressed.

  Then from the fatal field
  Upon a nation's heart
Borne like a warrior on his shield!--
  So should the brave depart.

  Death takes us by surprise,
  And stays our hurrying feet;
The great design unfinished lies,
  Our lives are incomplete.

  But in the dark unknown
  Perfect their circles seem,
Even as a bridge's arch of stone
  Is rounded in the stream.

  Alike are life and death,
  When life in death survives,
And the uninterrupted breath
  Inspires a thousand lives.

  Were a star quenched on high,
  For ages would its light,
Still travelling downward from the sky,
  Shine on our mortal sight.

  So when a great man dies,
  For years beyond our ken,
The light he leaves behind him lies
  Upon the paths of men.



TRAVELS BY THE FIRESIDE

The ceaseless rain is falling fast,
  And yonder gilded vane,
Immovable for three days past,
  Points to the misty main,

It drives me in upon myself
  And to the fireside gleams,
To pleasant books that crowd my shelf,
  And still more pleasant dreams,

I read whatever bards have sung
  Of lands beyond the sea,
And the bright days when I was young
  Come thronging back to me.

In fancy I can hear again
  The Alpine torrent's roar,
The mule-bells on the hills of Spain,
  The sea at Elsinore.

I see the convent's gleaming wall
  Rise from its groves of pine,
And towers of old cathedrals tall,
  And castles by the Rhine.

I journey on by park and spire,
  Beneath centennial trees,
Through fields with poppies all on fire,
  And gleams of distant seas.

I fear no more the dust and heat,
  No more I feel fatigue,
While journeying with another's feet
  O'er many a lengthening league.

Let others traverse sea and land,
  And toil through various climes,
I turn the world round with my hand
  Reading these poets' rhymes.

From them I learn whatever lies
  Beneath each changing zone,
And see, when looking with their eyes,
  Better than with mine own.



CADENABBIA

LAKE OF COMO

No sound of wheels or hoof-beat breaks
  The silence of the summer day,
As by the loveliest of all lakes
  I while the idle hours away.

I pace the leafy colonnade
  Where level branches of the plane
Above me weave a roof of shade
  Impervious to the sun and rain.

At times a sudden rush of air
  Flutters the lazy leaves o'erhead,
And gleams of sunshine toss and flare
  Like torches down the path I tread.

By Somariva's garden gate
  I make the marble stairs my seat,
And hear the water, as I wait,
  Lapping the steps beneath my feet.

The undulation sinks and swells
  Along the stony parapets,
And far away the floating bells
  Tinkle upon the fisher's nets.

Silent and slow, by tower and town
  The freighted barges come and go,
Their pendent shadows gliding down
  By town and tower submerged below.

The hills sweep upward from the shore,
  With villas scattered one by one
Upon their wooded spurs, and lower
  Bellaggio blazing in the sun.

And dimly seen, a tangled mass
  Of walls and woods, of light and shade,
Stands beckoning up the Stelvio Pass
  Varenna with its white cascade.

I ask myself, Is this a dream?
  Will it all vanish into air?
Is there a land of such supreme
  And perfect beauty anywhere?

Sweet vision!  Do not fade away;
  Linger until my heart shall take
Into itself the summer day,
  And all the beauty of the lake.

Linger until upon my brain
  Is stamped an image of the scene,
Then fade into the air again,
  And be as if thou hadst not been.



MONTE CASSINO

TERRA DI LAVORO

Beautiful valley! through whose verdant meads
  Unheard the Garigliano glides along;--
The Liris, nurse of rushes and of reeds,
  The river taciturn of classic song.

The Land of Labor and the Land of Rest,
  Where mediaeval towns are white on all
The hillsides, and where every mountain's crest
  Is an Etrurian or a Roman wall.

There is Alagna, where Pope Boniface
   Was dragged with contumely from his throne;
Sciarra Colonna, was that day's disgrace
  The Pontiff's only, or in part thine own?

There is Ceprano, where a renegade
  Was each Apulian, as great Dante saith,
When Manfred by his men-at-arms betrayed
  Spurred on to Benevento and to death.

There is Aquinum, the old Volscian town,
  Where Juvenal was born, whose lurid light
Still hovers o'er his birthplace like the crown
  Of splendor seen o'er cities in the night.

Doubled the splendor is, that in its streets
  The Angelic Doctor as a school-boy played,
And dreamed perhaps the dreams, that he repeats
  In ponderous folios for scholastics made.

And there, uplifted, like a passing cloud
  That pauses on a mountain summit high,
Monte Cassino's convent rears its proud
  And venerable walls against the sky.

Well I remember how on foot I climbed
  The stony pathway leading to its gate;
Above, the convent bells for vespers chimed,
  Below, the darkening town grew desolate.

Well I remember the low arch and dark,
  The court-yard with its well, the terrace wide,
From which, far down, the valley like a park
  Veiled in the evening mists, was dim descried.

The day was dying, and with feeble hands
  Caressed the mountain-tops; the vales between
Darkened; the river in the meadowlands
  Sheathed itself as a sword, and was not seen.

The silence of the place was like a sleep,
  So full of rest it seemed; each passing tread
Was a reverberation from the deep
  Recesses of the ages that are dead.

For, more than thirteen centuries ago,
  Benedict fleeing from the gates of Rome,
A youth disgusted with its vice and woe,
  Sought in these mountain solitudes a home.

He founded here his Convent and his Rule
  Of prayer and work, and counted work as prayer;
The pen became a clarion, and his school
  Flamed like a beacon in the midnight air.

What though Boccaccio, in his reckless way,
  Mocking the lazy brotherhood, deplores
The illuminated manuscripts, that lay
  Torn and neglected on the dusty floors?

Boccaccio was a novelist, a child
  Of fancy and of fiction at the best!
This the urbane librarian said, and smiled
  Incredulous, as at some idle jest.

Upon such themes as these, with one young friar
  I sat conversing late into the night,
Till in its cavernous chimney the woodfire
  Had burnt its heart out like an anchorite.

And then translated, in my convent cell,
  Myself yet not myself, in dreams I lay,
And, as a monk who hears the matin bell,
  Started from sleep; already it was day.

From the high window I beheld the scene
  On which Saint Benedict so oft had gazed,--
The mountains and the valley in the sheen
  Of the bright sun,--and stood as one amazed.

Gray mists were rolling, rising, vanishing;
  The woodlands glistened with their jewelled crowns;
Far off the mellow bells began to ring
  For matins in the half-awakened towns.

The conflict of the Present and the Past,
  The ideal and the actual in our life,
As on a field of battle held me fast,
  Where this world and the next world were at strife.

For, as the valley from its sleep awoke,
  I saw the iron horses of the steam
Toss to the morning air their plumes of smoke,
  And woke, as one awaketh from a dream.



AMALFI

Sweet the memory is to me
Of a land beyond the sea,
Where the waves and mountains meet,
Where, amid her mulberry-trees
Sits Amalfi in the heat,
Bathing ever her white feet
In the tideless summer seas.

In the middle of the town,
From its fountains in the hills,
Tumbling through the narrow gorge,
The Canneto rushes down,
Turns the great wheels of the mills,
Lifts the hammers of the forge.

'T is a stairway, not a street,
That ascends the deep ravine,
Where the torrent leaps between
Rocky walls that almost meet.
Toiling up from stair to stair
Peasant girls their burdens bear;
Sunburnt daughters of the soil,
Stately figures tall and straight,
What inexorable fate
Dooms them to this life of toil?

Lord of vineyards and of lands,
Far above the convent stands.
On its terraced walk aloof
Leans a monk with folded hands,
Placid, satisfied, serene,
Looking down upon the scene
Over wall and red-tiled roof;
Wondering unto what good end
All this toil and traffic tend,
And why all men cannot be
Free from care and free from pain,
And the sordid love of gain,
And as indolent as he.

Where are now the freighted barks
From the marts of east and west?
Where the knights in iron sarks
Journeying to the Holy Land,
Glove of steel upon the hand,
Cross of crimson on the breast?
Where the pomp of camp and court?
Where the pilgrims with their prayers?
Where the merchants with their wares,
And their gallant brigantines
Sailing safely into port
Chased by corsair Algerines?

Vanished like a fleet of cloud,
Like a passing trumpet-blast,
Are those splendors of the past,
And the commerce and the crowd!
Fathoms deep beneath the seas
Lie the ancient wharves and quays,
Swallowed by the engulfing waves;
Silent streets and vacant halls,
Ruined roofs and towers and walls;
Hidden from all mortal eyes
Deep the sunken city lies:
Even cities have their graves!

This is an enchanted land!
Round the headlands far away
Sweeps the blue Salernian bay
With its sickle of white sand:
Further still and furthermost
On the dim discovered coast
Paestum with its ruins lies,
And its roses all in bloom
Seem to tinge the fatal skies
Of that lonely land of doom.

On his terrace, high in air,
Nothing doth the good monk care
For such worldly themes as these,
From the garden just below
Little puffs of perfume blow,
And a sound is in his ears
Of the murmur of the bees
In the shining chestnut-trees;
Nothing else he heeds or hears.
All the landscape seems to swoon
In the happy afternoon;
Slowly o'er his senses creep
The encroaching waves of sleep,
And he sinks as sank the town,
Unresisting, fathoms down,
Into caverns cool and deep!

Walled about with drifts of snow,
Hearing the fierce north-wind blow,
Seeing all the landscape white,
And the river cased in ice,
Comes this memory of delight,
Comes this vision unto me
Of a long-lost Paradise
In the land beyond the sea.



THE SERMON OF ST. FRANCIS

Up soared the lark into the air,
A shaft of song, a winged prayer,
As if a soul, released from pain,
Were flying back to heaven again.

St. Francis heard; it was to him
An emblem of the Seraphim;
The upward motion of the fire,
The light, the heat, the heart's desire.

Around Assisi's convent gate
The birds, God's poor who cannot wait,
From moor and mere and darksome wood
Came flocking for their dole of food.

"O brother birds," St. Francis said,
"Ye come to me and ask for bread,
But not with bread alone to-day
Shall ye be fed and sent away.

"Ye shall be fed, ye happy birds,
With manna of celestial words;
Not mine, though mine they seem to be,
Not mine, though they be spoken through me.

"O, doubly are ye bound to praise
The great Creator in your lays;
He giveth you your plumes of down,
Your crimson hoods, your cloaks of brown.

"He giveth you your wings to fly
And breathe a purer air on high,
And careth for you everywhere,
Who for yourselves so little care!"

With flutter of swift wings and songs
Together rose the feathered throngs,
And singing scattered far apart;
Deep peace was in St. Francis' heart.

He knew not if the brotherhood
His homily had understood;
He only knew that to one ear
The meaning of his words was clear.



BELISARIUS

I am poor and old and blind;
The sun burns me, and the wind
    Blows through the city gate
And covers me with dust
From the wheels of the august
    Justinian the Great.

It was for him I chased
The Persians o'er wild and waste,
    As General of the East;
Night after night I lay
In their camps of yesterday;
    Their forage was my feast.

For him, with sails of red,
And torches at mast-head,
    Piloting the great fleet,
I swept the Afric coasts
And scattered the Vandal hosts,
    Like dust in a windy street.

For him I won again
The Ausonian realm and reign,
    Rome and Parthenope;
And all the land was mine
From the summits of Apennine
    To the shores of either sea.

For him, in my feeble age,
I dared the battle's rage,
    To save Byzantium's state,
When the tents of Zabergan,
Like snow-drifts overran
    The road to the Golden Gate.

And for this, for this, behold!
Infirm and blind and old,
    With gray, uncovered head,
Beneath the very arch
Of my triumphal march,
    I stand and beg my bread!

Methinks I still can hear,
Sounding distinct and near,
    The Vandal monarch's cry,
As, captive and disgraced,
With majestic step he paced,--
    "All, all is Vanity!"

Ah! vainest of all things
Is the gratitude of kings;
    The plaudits of the crowd
Are but the clatter of feet
At midnight in the street,
    Hollow and restless and loud.

But the bitterest disgrace
Is to see forever the face
    Of the Monk of Ephesus!
The unconquerable will
This, too, can bear;--I still
    Am Belisarius!



SONGO RIVER

Nowhere such a devious stream,
Save in fancy or in dream,
Winding slow through bush and brake
Links together lake and lake.

Walled with woods or sandy shelf,
Ever doubling on itself
Flows the stream, so still and slow
That it hardly seems to flow.

Never errant knight of old,
Lost in woodland or on wold,
Such a winding path pursued
Through the sylvan solitude.

Never school-boy in his quest
After hazel-nut or nest,
Through the forest in and out
Wandered loitering thus about.

In the mirror of its tide
Tangled thickets on each side
Hang inverted, and between
Floating cloud or sky serene.

Swift or swallow on the wing
Seems the only living thing,
Or the loon, that laughs and flies
Down to those reflected skies.

Silent stream! thy Indian name
Unfamiliar is to fame;
For thou hidest here alone,
Well content to be unknown.

But thy tranquil waters teach
Wisdom deep as human speech,
Moving without haste or noise
In unbroken equipoise.

Though thou turnest no busy mill,
And art ever calm and still,
Even thy silence seems to say
To the traveller on his way:--

"Traveller, hurrying from the heat
Of the city, stay thy feet!
Rest awhile, nor longer waste
Life with inconsiderate haste!

"Be not like a stream that brawls
Loud with shallow waterfalls,
But in quiet self-control
Link together soul and soul"


************

KERAMOS

Turn, turn, my wheel?  Turn round and round
Without a pause, without a sound:
  So spins the flying world away!
This clay, well mixed with marl and sand,
Follows the motion of my hand;
Far some must follow, and some command,
  Though all are made of clay!

Thus sang the Potter at his task
Beneath the blossoming hawthorn-tree,
While o'er his features, like a mask,
The quilted sunshine and leaf-shade
Moved, as the boughs above him swayed,
And clothed him, till he seemed to be
A figure woven in tapestry,
So sumptuously was he arrayed
In that magnificent attire
Of sable tissue flaked with fire.
Like a magician he appeared,
A conjurer without book or beard;
And while he plied his magic art--
For it was magical to me--
I stood in silence and apart,
And wondered more and more to see
That shapeless, lifeless mass of clay
Rise up to meet the master's hand,
And now contract and now expand,
And even his slightest touch obey;
While ever in a thoughtful mood
He sang his ditty, and at times
Whistled a tune between the rhymes,
As a melodious interlude.

Turn, turn, my wheel!  All things must change
To something new, to something strange;
  Nothing that is can pause or stay;
The moon will wax, the moon will wane,
The mist and cloud will turn to rain,
The rain to mist and cloud again,
  To-morrow be to-day.

Thus still the Potter sang, and still,
By some unconscious act of will,
The melody and even the words
Were intermingled with my thought
As bits of colored thread are caught
And woven into nests of birds.
And thus to regions far remote,
Beyond the ocean's vast expanse,
This wizard in the motley coat
Transported me on wings of song,
And by the northern shores of France
Bore me with restless speed along.
What land is this that seems to be
A mingling of the land and sea?
This land of sluices, dikes, and dunes?
This water-net, that tessellates
The landscape? this unending maze
Of gardens, through whose latticed gates
The imprisoned pinks and tulips gaze;
Where in long summer afternoons
The sunshine, softened by the haze,
Comes streaming down as through a screen;
Where over fields and pastures green
The painted ships float high in air,
And over all and everywhere
The sails of windmills sink and soar
Like wings of sea-gulls on the shore?

What land is this? Yon pretty town
Is Delft, with all its wares displayed;
The pride, the market-place, the crown
And centre of the Potter's trade.
See! every house and room is bright
With glimmers of reflected light
From plates that on the dresser shine;
Flagons to foam with Flemish beer,
Or sparkle with the Rhenish wine,
And pilgrim flasks with fleurs-de-lis,
And ships upon a rolling sea,
And tankards pewter topped, and queer
With comic mask and musketeer!
Each hospitable chimney smiles
A welcome from its painted tiles;
The parlor walls, the chamber floors,
The stairways and the corridors,
The borders of the garden walks,
Are beautiful with fadeless flowers,
That never droop in winds or showers,
And never wither on their stalks.

Turn, turn, my wheel!  All life is brief;
What now is bud wilt soon be leaf,
  What now is leaf will soon decay;
The wind blows east, the wind blows west;
The blue eyes in the robin's nest
Will soon have wings and beak and breast,
  And flutter and fly away.

Now southward through the air I glide,
The song my only pursuivant,
And see across the landscape wide
The blue Charente, upon whose tide
The belfries and the spires of Saintes
Ripple and rock from side to side,
As, when an earthquake rends its walls,
A crumbling city reels and falls.

Who is it in the suburbs here,
This Potter, working with such cheer,
In this mean house, this mean attire,
His manly features bronzed with fire,
Whose figulines and rustic wares
Scarce find him bread from day to day?
This madman, as the people say,
Who breaks his tables and his chairs
To feed his furnace fires, nor cares
Who goes unfed if they are fed,
Nor who may live if they are dead?
This alchemist with hollow cheeks
And sunken, searching eyes, who seeks,
By mingled earths and ores combined
With potency of fire, to find
Some new enamel, hard and bright,
His dream, his passion, his delight?

O Palissy! within thy breast
Burned the hot fever of unrest;
Thine was the prophets vision, thine
The exultation, the divine
Insanity of noble minds,
That never falters nor abates,
But labors and endures and waits,
Till all that it foresees it finds,
Or what it cannot find creates!

Turn, turn, my wheel!  This earthen jar
A touch can make, a touch can mar;
  And shall it to the Potter say,
What makest thou.  Thou hast no hand?
As men who think to understand
A world by their Creator planned,
  Who wiser is than they.

Still guided by the dreamy song,
As in a trance I float along
Above the Pyrenean chain,
Above the fields and farms of Spain,
Above the bright Majorcan isle,
That lends its softened name to art,--
A spot, a dot upon the chart,
Whose little towns, red-roofed with tile,
Are ruby-lustred with the light
Of blazing furnaces by night,
And crowned by day with wreaths of smoke.
Then eastward, wafted in my flight
On my enchanter's magic cloak,
I sail across the Tyrrhene Sea
Into the land of Italy,
And o'er the windy Apennines,
Mantled and musical with pines.

The palaces, the princely halls,
The doors of houses and the walls
Of churches and of belfry towers,
Cloister and castle, street and mart,
Are garlanded and gay with flowers
That blossom in the fields of art.
Here Gubbio's workshops gleam and glow
With brilliant, iridescent dyes,
The dazzling whiteness of the snow,
The cobalt blue of summer skies;
And vase and scutcheon, cup and plate,
In perfect finish emulate
Faenza, Florence, Pesaro.

Forth from Urbino's gate there came
A youth with the angelic name
Of Raphael, in form and face
Himself angelic, and divine
In arts of color and design.
From him Francesco Xanto caught
Something of his transcendent grace,
And into fictile fabrics wrought
Suggestions of the master's thought.
Nor less Maestro Giorgio shines
With madre-perl and golden lines
Of arabesques, and interweaves
His birds and fruits and flowers and leaves
About some landscape, shaded brown,
With olive tints on rock and town.
Behold this cup within whose bowl,
Upon a ground of deepest blue
With yellow-lustred stars o'erlaid,
Colors of every tint and hue
Mingle in one harmonious whole!
With large blue eyes and steadfast gaze,
Her yellow hair in net and braid,
Necklace and ear-rings all ablaze
With golden lustre o'er the glaze,
A woman's portrait; on the scroll,
Cana, the Beautiful!  A name
Forgotten save for such brief fame
As this memorial can bestow,--
A gift some lover long ago
Gave with his heart to this fair dame.

A nobler title to renown
Is thine, O pleasant Tuscan town,
Seated beside the Arno's stream;
For Lucca della Robbia there
Created forms so wondrous fair,
They made thy sovereignty supreme.
These choristers with lips of stone,
Whose music is not heard, but seen,
Still chant, as from their organ-screen,
Their Maker's praise; nor these alone,
But the more fragile forms of clay,
Hardly less beautiful than they,
These saints and angels that adorn
The walls of hospitals, and tell
The story of good deeds so well
That poverty seems less forlorn,
And life more like a holiday.

Here in this old neglected church,
That long eludes the traveller's search,
Lies the dead bishop on his tomb;
Earth upon earth he slumbering lies,
Life-like and death-like in the gloom;
Garlands of fruit and flowers in bloom
And foliage deck his resting place;
A shadow in the sightless eyes,
A pallor on the patient face,
Made perfect by the furnace heat;
All earthly passions and desires
Burnt out by purgatorial fires;
Seeming to say, "Our years are fleet,
And to the weary death is sweet."

But the most wonderful of all
The ornaments on tomb or wall
That grace the fair Ausonian shores
Are those the faithful earth restores,
Near some Apulian town concealed,
In vineyard or in harvest field,--
Vases and urns and bas-reliefs,
Memorials of forgotten griefs,
Or records of heroic deeds
Of demigods and mighty chiefs:
Figures that almost move and speak,
And, buried amid mould and weeds,
Still in their attitudes attest
The presence of the graceful Greek,--
Achilles in his armor dressed,
Alcides with the Cretan bull,
And Aphrodite with her boy,
Or lovely Helena of Troy,
Still living and still beautiful.

Turn, turn, my wheel!  'T is nature's plan
The child should grow into the man,
  The man grow wrinkled, old, and gray;
In youth the heart exults and sings,
The pulses leap, the feet have wings;
In age the cricket chirps, and brings
  The harvest home of day.

And now the winds that southward blow,
And cool the hot Sicilian isle,
Bear me away.  I see below
The long line of the Libyan Nile,
Flooding and feeding the parched land
With annual ebb and overflow,
A fallen palm whose branches lie
Beneath the Abyssinian sky,
Whose roots are in Egyptian sands,
On either bank huge water-wheels,
Belted with jars and dripping weeds,
Send forth their melancholy moans,
As if, in their gray mantles hid,
Dead anchorites of the Thebaid
Knelt on the shore and told their beads,
Beating their breasts with loud appeals
And penitential tears and groans.

This city, walled and thickly set
With glittering mosque and minaret,
Is Cairo, in whose gay bazaars
The dreaming traveller first inhales
The perfume of Arabian gales,
And sees the fabulous earthen jars,
Huge as were those wherein the maid
Morgiana found the Forty Thieves
Concealed in midnight ambuscade;
And seeing, more than half believes
The fascinating tales that run
Through all the Thousand Nights and One,
Told by the fair Scheherezade.

More strange and wonderful than these
Are the Egyptian deities,
Ammonn, and Emeth, and the grand
Osiris, holding in his hand
The lotus; Isis, crowned and veiled;
The sacred Ibis, and the Sphinx;
Bracelets with blue enamelled links;
The Scarabee in emerald mailed,
Or spreading wide his funeral wings;
Lamps that perchance their night-watch kept
O'er Cleopatra while she slept,--
All plundered from the tombs of kings.

Turn, turn, my wheel!  The human race,
Of every tongue, of every place,
  Caucasian, Coptic, or Malay,
All that inhabit this great earth,
Whatever be their rank or worth,
Are kindred and allied by birth,
  And made of the same clay.

O'er desert sands, o'er gulf and bay,
O'er Ganges and o'er Himalay,
Bird-like I fly, and flying sing,
To flowery kingdoms of Cathay,
And bird-like poise on balanced wing
Above the town of King-te-tching,
A burning town, or seeming so,--
Three thousand furnaces that glow
Incessantly, and fill the air
With smoke uprising, gyre on gyre
And painted by the lurid glare,
Of jets and flashes of red fire.

As leaves that in the autumn fall,
Spotted and veined with various hues,
Are swept along the avenues,
And lie in heaps by hedge and wall,
So from this grove of chimneys whirled
To all the markets of the world,
These porcelain leaves are wafted on,--
Light yellow leaves with spots and stains
Of violet and of crimson dye,
Or tender azure of a sky
Just washed by gentle April rains,
And beautiful with celadon.

Nor less the coarser household wares,--
The willow pattern, that we knew
In childhood, with its bridge of blue
Leading to unknown thoroughfares;
The solitary man who stares
At the white river flowing through
Its arches, the fantastic trees
And wild perspective of the view;
And intermingled among these
The tiles that in our nurseries
Filled us with wonder and delight,
Or haunted us in dreams at night.

And yonder by Nankin, behold!
The Tower of Porcelain, strange and old,
Uplifting to the astonished skies
Its ninefold painted balconies,
With balustrades of twining leaves,
And roofs of tile, beneath whose eaves
Hang porcelain bells that all the time
Ring with a soft, melodious chime;
While the whole fabric is ablaze
With varied tints, all fused in one
Great mass of color, like a maze
Of flowers illumined by the sun.

Turn, turn, my wheel!  What is begun
At daybreak must at dark be done,
  To-morrow will be another day;
To-morrow the hot furnace flame
Will search the heart and try the frame,
And stamp with honor or with shame
  These vessels made of clay.

Cradled and rocked in Eastern seas,
The islands of the Japanese
Beneath me lie; o'er lake and plain
The stork, the heron, and the crane
Through the clear realms of azure drift,
And on the hillside I can see
The villages of Imari,
Whose thronged and flaming workshops lift
Their twisted columns of smoke on high,
Cloud cloisters that in ruins lie,
With sunshine streaming through each rift,
And broken arches of blue sky.

All the bright flowers that fill the land,
Ripple of waves on rock or sand,
The snow on Fusiyama's cone,
The midnight heaven so thickly sown
With constellations of bright stars,
The leaves that rustle, the reeds that make
A whisper by each stream and lake,
The saffron dawn, the sunset red,
Are painted on these lovely jars;
Again the skylark sings, again
The stork, the heron, and the crane
Float through the azure overhead,
The counterfeit and counterpart
Of Nature reproduced in Art.

Art is the child of Nature; yes,
Her darling child, in whom we trace
The features of the mother's face,
Her aspect and her attitude,
All her majestic loveliness
Chastened and softened and subdued
Into a more attractive grace,
And with a human sense imbued.
He is the greatest artist, then,
Whether of pencil or of pen,
Who follows Nature.  Never man,
As artist or as artisan,
Pursuing his own fantasies,
Can touch the human heart, or please,
Or satisfy our nobler needs,
As he who sets his willing feet
In Nature's footprints, light and fleet,
And follows fearless where she leads.

Thus mused I on that morn in May,
Wrapped in my visions like the Seer,
Whose eyes behold not what is near,
But only what is far away,
When, suddenly sounding peal on peal,
The church-bell from the neighboring town
Proclaimed the welcome hour of noon.
The Potter heard, and stopped his wheel,
His apron on the grass threw down,
Whistled his quiet little tune,
Not overloud nor overlong,
And ended thus his simple song:

Stop, stop, my wheel!  Too soon, too soon
The noon will be the afternoon,
  Too soon to-day be yesterday;
Behind us in our path we cast
The broken potsherds of the past,
And all are ground to dust a last,
  And trodden into clay!

*************


BIRDS OF PASSAGE

FLIGHT THE FIFTH

THE HERONS OF ELMWOOD

Warm and still is the summer night,
  As here by the river's brink I wander;
White overhead are the stars, and white
  The glimmering lamps on the hillside yonder.

Silent are all the sounds of day;
  Nothing I hear but the chirp of crickets,
And the cry of the herons winging their way
  O'er the poet's house in the Elmwood thickets.

Call to him, herons, as slowly you pass
  To your roosts in the haunts of the exiled thrushes,
Sing him the song of the green morass;
  And the tides that water the reeds and rushes.

Sing him the mystical Song of the Hern,
  And the secret that baffles our utmost seeking;
For only a sound of lament we discern,
  And cannot interpret the words you are speaking.

Sing of the air, and the wild delight
  Of wings that uplift and winds that uphold you,
The joy of freedom, the rapture of flight
  Through the drift of the floating mists that infold you.

Of the landscape lying so far below,
  With its towns and rivers and desert places;
And the splendor of light above, and the glow
  Of the limitless, blue, ethereal spaces.

Ask him if songs of the Troubadours,
  Or of Minnesingers in old black-letter,
Sound in his ears more sweet than yours,
  And if yours are not sweeter and wilder and better.

Sing to him, say to him, here at his gate,
  Where the boughs of the stately elms are meeting,
Some one hath lingered to meditate,
  And send him unseen this friendly greeting;

That many another hath done the same,
  Though not by a sound was the silence broken;
The surest pledge of a deathless name
  Is the silent homage of thoughts unspoken.



A DUTCH PICTURE

Simon Danz has come home again,
  From cruising about with his buccaneers;
He has singed the beard of the King of Spain,
And carried away the Dean of Jaen
  And sold him in Algiers.

In his house by the Maese, with its roof of tiles,
  And weathercocks flying aloft in air,
There are silver tankards of antique styles,
Plunder of convent and castle, and piles
  Of carpets rich and rare.

In his tulip-garden there by the town,
  Overlooking the sluggish stream,
With his Moorish cap and dressing-gown,
The old sea-captain, hale and brown,
  Walks in a waking dream.

A smile in his gray mustachio lurks
Whenever he thinks of the King of Spain,
And the listed tulips look like Turks,
And the silent gardener as he works
  Is changed to the Dean of Jaen.

The windmills on the outermost
  Verge of the landscape in the haze,
To him are towers on the Spanish coast,
With whiskered sentinels at their post,
  Though this is the river Maese.

But when the winter rains begin,
  He sits and smokes by the blazing brands,
And old seafaring men come in,
Goat-bearded, gray, and with double chin,
  And rings upon their hands.

They sit there in the shadow and shine
  Of the flickering fire of the winter night;
Figures in color and design
Like those by Rembrandt of the Rhine,
  Half darkness and half light.

And they talk of ventures lost or won,
  And their talk is ever and ever the same,
While they drink the red wine of Tarragon,
From the cellars of some Spanish Don,
  Or convent set on flame.

Restless at times with heavy strides
  He paces his parlor to and fro;
He is like a ship that at anchor rides,
And swings with the rising and falling tides,
  And tugs at her anchor-tow.

Voices mysterious far and near,
  Sound of the wind and sound of the sea,
Are calling and whispering in his ear,
"Simon Danz! Why stayest thou here?
  Come forth and follow me!"

So he thinks he shall take to the sea again
  For one more cruise with his buccaneers,
To singe the beard of the King of Spain,
And capture another Dean of Jaen
  And sell him in Algiers.



CASTLES IN SPAIN

How much of my young heart, O Spain,
  Went out to thee in days of yore!
What dreams romantic filled my brain,
And summoned back to life again
The Paladins of Charlemagne
 The Cid Campeador!

And shapes more shadowy than these,
  In the dim twilight half revealed;
Phoenician galleys on the seas,
The Roman camps like hives of bees,
The Goth uplifting from his knees
  Pelayo on his shield.

It was these memories perchance,
  From annals of remotest eld,
That lent the colors of romance
To every trivial circumstance,
And changed the form and countenance
  Of all that I beheld.

Old towns, whose history lies hid
  In monkish chronicle or rhyme,
Burgos, the birthplace of the Cid,
Zamora and Valladolid,
Toledo, built and walled amid
  The wars of Wamba's time;

The long, straight line of the high-way,
  The distant town that seems so near,
The peasants in the fields, that stay
Their toil to cross themselves and pray,
When from the belfry at midday
  The Angelus they hear;

White crosses in the mountain pass,
  Mules gay with tassels, the loud din
Of muleteers, the tethered ass
That crops the dusty wayside grass,
And cavaliers with spurs of brass
  Alighting at the inn;

White hamlets hidden in fields of wheat,
   White cities slumbering by the sea,
White sunshine flooding square and street,
Dark mountain-ranges, at whose feet
The river-beds are dry with heat,--
  All was a dream to me.

Yet something sombre and severe
  O'er the enchanted landscape reigned;
A terror in the atmosphere
As if King Philip listened near,
Or Torquemada, the austere,
  His ghostly sway maintained.

The softer Andalusian skies
  Dispelled the sadness and the gloom;
There Cadiz by the seaside lies,
And Seville's orange-orchards rise,
Making the land a paradise
  Of beauty and of bloom.

There Cordova is hidden among
  The palm, the olive, and the vine;
Gem of the South, by poets sung,
And in whose Mosque Ahmanzor hung
As lamps the bells that once had rung
  At Compostella's shrine.

But over all the rest supreme,
  The star of stars, the cynosure,
The artist's and the poet's theme,
The young man's vision, the old man's dream,--
Granada by its winding stream,
  The city of the Moor!

And there the Alhambra still recalls
  Aladdin's palace of delight;
Allah il Allah! through its halls
Whispers the fountain as it falls,
The Darro darts beneath its walls,
  The hills with snow are white.

Ah yes, the hills are white with snow,
  And cold with blasts that bite and freeze;
But in the happy vale below
The orange and pomegranate grow,
And wafts of air toss to and fro
  The blossoming almond-trees.

The Vega cleft by the Xenil,
  The fascination and allure
Of the sweet landscape chains the will;
The traveller lingers on the hill,
His parted lips are breathing still
  The last sigh of the Moor.

How like a ruin overgrown
  With flower's that hide the rents of time,
Stands now the Past that I have known,
Castles in Spain, not built of stone
But of white summer clouds, and blown
  Into this little mist of rhyme!



VITTORIA COLONNA.

VITTORIA COLONNA, on the death of her hushand, the Marchese di
Pescara, retired to her castle at Ischia (Inarime), and there
wrote the Ode upon his death, which gained her the title of
Divine.

Once more, once more, Inarime,
  I see thy purple hills!--once more
I hear the billows of the bay
  Wash the white pebbles on thy shore.

High o'er the sea-surge and the sands,
  Like a great galleon wrecked and cast
Ashore by storms, thy castle stands,
  A mouldering landmark of the Past.

Upon its terrace-walk I see
  A phantom gliding to and fro;
It is Colonna,--it is she
  Who lived and loved so long ago.

Pescara's beautiful young wife,
  The type of perfect womanhood,
Whose life was love, the life of life,
  That time and change and death withstood.

For death, that breaks the marriage band
  In others, only closer pressed
The wedding-ring upon her hand
  And closer locked and barred her breast.

She knew the life-long martyrdom,
  The weariness, the endless pain
Of waiting for some one to come
  Who nevermore would come again.

The shadows of the chestnut-trees,
  The odor of the orange blooms,
The song of birds, and, more than these,
  The silence of deserted rooms;

The respiration of the sea,
  The soft caresses of the air,
All things in nature seemed to be
  But ministers of her despair;

Till the o'erburdened heart, so long
  Imprisoned in itself, found vent
And voice in one impassioned song
  Of inconsolable lament.

Then as the sun, though hidden from sight,
  Transmutes to gold the leaden mist,
Her life was interfused with light,
  From realms that, though unseen, exist,

Inarime!  Inarime!
  Thy castle on the crags above
In dust shall crumble and decay,
  But not the memory of her love.



THE REVENGE OF RAIN-IN-THE-FACE

In that desolate land and lone,
Where the Big Horn and Yellowstone
  Roar down their mountain path,
By their fires the Sioux Chiefs
Muttered their woes and griefs
  And the menace of their wrath.

"Revenge!" cried Rain-in-the-Face,
"Revenue upon all the race
  Of the White Chief with yellow hair!"
And the mountains dark and high
From their crags re-echoed the cry
  Of his anger and despair.

In the meadow, spreading wide
By woodland and riverside
  The Indian village stood;
All was silent as a dream,
Save the rushing a of the stream
  And the blue-jay in the wood.

In his war paint and his beads,
Like a bison among the reeds,
  In ambush the Sitting Bull
Lay with three thousand braves
 Crouched in the clefts and caves,
 Savage, unmerciful!

Into the fatal snare
The White Chief with yellow hair
  And his three hundred men
Dashed headlong, sword in hand;
But of that gallant band
  Not one returned again.

The sudden darkness of death
Overwhelmed them like the breath
  And smoke of a furnace fire:
By the river's bank, and between
The rocks of the ravine,
  They lay in their bloody attire.

But the foemen fled in the night,
And Rain-in-the-Face, in his flight
  Uplifted high in air
As a ghastly trophy, bore
The brave heart, that beat no more,
  Of the White Chief with yellow hair.

Whose was the right and the wrong?
Sing it, O funeral song,
  With a voice that is full of tears,
And say that our broken faith
Wrought all this ruin and scathe,
  In the Year of a Hundred Years.



TO THE RIVER YVETTE

O lovely river of Yvette!
  O darling river! like a bride,
Some dimpled, bashful, fair Lisette,
  Thou goest to wed the Orge's tide.

Maincourt, and lordly Dampierre,
  See and salute thee on thy way,
And, with a blessing and a prayer,
  Ring the sweet bells of St. Forget.

The valley of Chevreuse in vain
  Would hold thee in its fond embrace;
Thou glidest from its arms again
  And hurriest on with swifter pace.

Thou wilt not stay; with restless feet
  Pursuing still thine onward flight,
Thou goest as one in haste to meet
  Her sole desire, her head's delight.

O lovely river of Yvette!
  O darling stream! on balanced wings
The wood-birds sang the chansonnette
  That here a wandering poet sings.



THE EMPEROR'S GLOVE

"Combien faudrait-il de peaux d'Espagne pour faire un gant de
cette grandeur?"  A play upon the words gant, a glove, and Gand,
the French for Ghent.

On St. Baron's tower, commanding
  Half of Flanders, his domain,
Charles the Emperor once was standing,
While beneath him on the landing
  Stood Duke Alva and his train.

Like a print in books of fables,
  Or a model made for show,
With its pointed roofs and gables,
Dormer windows, scrolls and labels,
  Lay the city far below.

Through its squares and streets and alleys
  Poured the populace of Ghent;
As a routed army rallies,
Or as rivers run through valleys,
  Hurrying to their homes they went

"Nest of Lutheran misbelievers!"
  Cried Duke Alva as he gazed;
"Haunt of traitors and deceivers,
Stronghold of insurgent weavers,
  Let it to the ground be razed!"

On the Emperor's cap the feather
  Nods, as laughing he replies:
"How many skins of Spanish leather,
Think you, would, if stitched together
  Make a glove of such a size?"



A BALLAD OF THE FRENCH FLEET

OCTOBER, 1746

MR. THOMAS PRINCE loquitur.

A fleet with flags arrayed
  Sailed from the port of Brest,
And the Admiral's ship displayed
  The signal: "Steer southwest."
For this Admiral D'Anville
  Had sworn by cross and crown
To ravage with fire and steel
  Our helpless Boston Town.

There were rumors in the street,
  In the houses there was fear
Of the coming of the fleet,
  And the danger hovering near.
And while from mouth to mouth
  Spread the tidings of dismay,
I stood in the Old South,
  Saying humbly: "Let us pray!

"O Lord! we would not advise;
  But if in thy Providence
A tempest should arise
  To drive the French fleet hence,
And scatter it far and wide,
  Or sink it in the sea,
We should be satisfied,
  And thine the glory be."

This was the prayer I made,
  For my soul was all on flame,
And even as I prayed
  The answering tempest came;
It came with a mighty power,
  Shaking the windows and walls,
And tolling the bell in the tower,
  As it tolls at funerals.

The lightning suddenly
  Unsheathed its flaming sword,
And I cried: "Stand still, and see
  The salvation of the Lord!"
The heavens were black with cloud,
  The sea was white with hail,
And ever more fierce and loud
  Blew the October gale.

The fleet it overtook,
  And the broad sails in the van
Like the tents of Cushan shook,
  Or the curtains of Midian.
Down on the reeling decks
  Crashed the o'erwhelming seas;
Ah, never were there wrecks
  So pitiful as these!

Like a potter's vessel broke
  The great ships of the line;
They were carried away as a smoke,
  Or sank like lead in the brine.
O Lord! before thy path
  They vanished and ceased to be,
When thou didst walk in wrath
  With thine horses through the sea!



THE LEAP OF ROUSHAN BEG

Mounted on Kyrat strong and fleet,
His chestnut steed with four white feet,
  Roushan Beg, called Kurroglou,
Son of the road and bandit chief,
Seeking refuge and relief,
  Up the mountain pathway flew.

Such was Kyrat's wondrous speed,
Never yet could any steed
  Reach the dust-cloud in his course.
More than maiden, more than wife,
More than gold and next to life
  Roushan the Robber loved his horse.

In the land that lies beyond
Erzeroum and Trebizond,
  Garden-girt his fortress stood;
Plundered khan, or caravan
Journeying north from Koordistan,
  Gave him wealth and wine and food.

Seven hundred and fourscore
Men at arms his livery wore,
  Did his bidding night and day.
Now, through regions all unknown,
He was wandering, lost, alone,
  Seeking without guide his way.

Suddenly the pathway ends,
Sheer the precipice descends,
  Loud the torrent roars unseen;
Thirty feet from side to side
Yawns the chasm; on air must ride
  He who crosses this ravine.

Following close in his pursuit,
At the precipice's foot,
  Reyhan the Arab of Orfah
Halted with his hundred men,
Shouting upward from the glen,
  "La Illah illa Allah!"

Gently Roushan Beg caressed
Kyrat's forehead, neck, and breast;
  Kissed him upon both his eyes;
Sang to him in his wild way,
As upon the topmost spray
  Sings a bird before it flies.

"O my Kyrat, O my steed,
Round and slender as a reed,
  Carry me this peril through!
Satin housings shall be thine,
Shoes of gold, O Kyrat mine,
  O thou soul of Kurroglou!

"Soft thy skin as silken skein,
Soft as woman's hair thy mane,
  Tender are thine eyes and true;
All thy hoofs like ivory shine,
Polished bright; O, life of mine,
  Leap, and rescue Kurroglou!"

Kyrat, then, the strong and fleet,
Drew together his four white feet,
  Paused a moment on the verge,
Measured with his eye the space,
And into the air's embrace
  Leaped as leaps the ocean surge.

As the ocean surge o'er sand
Bears a swimmer safe to land,
  Kyrat safe his rider bore;
Rattling down the deep abyss
Fragments of the precipice
  Rolled like pebbles on a shore.

Roushan's tasselled cap of red
Trembled not upon his head,
  Careless sat he and upright;
Neither hand nor bridle shook,
Nor his head he turned to look,
  As he galloped out of sight.

Flash of harness in the air,
Seen a moment like the glare
  Of a sword drawn from its sheath;
Thus the phantom horseman passed,
And the shadow that he cast
  Leaped the cataract underneath.

Reyhan the Arab held his breath
While this vision of life and death
  Passed above him.  "Allahu!"
Cried he.  "In all Koordistan
Lives there not so brave a man
  As this Robber Kurroglou!"



HAROUN AL RASCHID

One day, Haroun Al Raschid read
A book wherein the poet said:--

"Where are the kings, and where the rest
Of those who once the world possessed?

"They're gone with all their pomp and show,
They're gone the way that thou shalt go.

"O thou who choosest for thy share
The world, and what the world calls fair,

"Take all that it can give or lend,
But know that death is at the end!"

Haroun Al Raschid bowed his head:
Tears fell upon the page he read.



KING TRISANKU

Viswamitra the Magician,
  By his spells and incantations,
Up to Indra's realms elysian
  Raised Trisanku, king of nations.

Indra and the gods offended
  Hurled him downward, and descending
In the air he hung suspended,
  With these equal powers contending.

Thus by aspirations lifted,
  By misgivings downward driven,
Human hearts are tossed and drifted
  Midway between earth and heaven.



A WRAITH IN THE MIST

 "Sir, I should build me a fortification, if I
came to live here." --BOSWELL'S Johnson.

On the green little isle of Inchkenneth,
  Who is it that walks by the shore,
So gay with his Highland blue bonnet,
  So brave with his targe and claymore?

His form is the form of a giant,
  But his face wears an aspect of pain;
Can this be the Laird of Inchkenneth?
  Can this be Sir Allan McLean?

Ah, no!  It is only the Rambler,
  The Idler, who lives in Bolt Court,
And who says, were he Laird of Inchkenneth,
  He would wall himself round with a fort.



THE THREE KINGS

Three Kings came riding from far away,
  Melchior and Gaspar and Baltasar;
Three Wise Men out of the East were they,
And they travelled by night and they slept by day,
  For their guide was a beautiful, wonderful star.

The star was so beautiful, large, and clear,
  That all the other stars of the sky
Became a white mist in the atmosphere,
And by this they knew that the coming was near
  Of the Prince foretold in the prophecy.

Three caskets they bore on their saddle-bows,
  Three caskets of gold with golden keys;
Their robes were of crimson silk with rows
Of bells and pomegranates and furbelows,
  Their turbans like blossoming almond-trees.

And so the Three Kings rode into the West,
  Through the dusk of night, over hill and dell,
And sometimes they nodded with beard on breast
And sometimes talked, as they paused to rest,
  With the people they met at some wayside well.

"Of the child that is born," said Baltasar,
  "Good people, I pray you, tell us the news;
For we in the East have seen his star,
And have ridden fast, and have ridden far,
  To find and worship the King of the Jews."

And the people answered, "You ask in vain;
  We know of no king but Herod the Great!"
They thought the Wise Men were men insane,
As they spurred their horses across the plain,
  Like riders in haste, and who cannot wait.

And when they came to Jerusalem,
  Herod the Great, who had heard this thing,
Sent for the Wise Men and questioned them;
And said, "Go down unto Bethlehem,
  And bring me tidings of this new king."

So they rode away; and the star stood still,
  The only one in the gray of morn
Yes, it stopped, it stood still of its own free will,
Right over Bethlehem on the hill,
  The city of David where Christ was born.

And the Three Kings rode through the gate and the guard,
  Through the silent street, till their horses turned
And neighed as they entered the great inn-yard;
But the windows were closed, and the doors were barred,
  And only a light in the stable burned.

And cradled there in the scented hay,
  In the air made sweet by the breath of kine,
The little child in the manger lay,
The child, that would be king one day
  Of a kingdom not human but divine.

His mother Mary of Nazareth
  Sat watching beside his place of rest,
Watching the even flow of his breath,
For the joy of life and the terror of death
  Were mingled together in her breast.

They laid their offerings at his feet:
  The gold was their tribute to a King,
The frankincense, with its odor sweet,
Was for the Priest, the Paraclete,
  The myrrh for the body's burying.

And the mother wondered and bowed her head,
  And sat as still as a statue of stone;
Her heart was troubled yet comforted,
Remembering what the Angel had said
  Of an endless reign and of David's throne.

Then the Kings rode out of the city gate,
  With a clatter of hoofs in proud array;
But they went not back to Herod the Great,
For they knew his malice and feared his hate,
  And returned to their homes by another way.



SONG

Stay, stay at home, my heart, and rest;
Home-keeping hearts are happiest,
For those that wander they know not where
Are full of trouble and full of care;
    To stay at home is best.

Weary and homesick and distressed,
They wander east, they wander west,
And are baffled and beaten and blown about
By the winds of the wilderness of doubt;
    To stay at home is best.

Then stay at home, my heart, and rest;
The bird is safest in its nest;
O'er all that flutter their wings and fly
A hawk is hovering in the sky;
    To stay at home is best.



THE WHITE CZAR

The White Czar is Peter the Great.  Batyushka, Father dear, and
Gosudar, Sovereign, are titles the Russian people are fond of
giving to the Czar in their popular songs.

Dost thou see on the rampart's height
That wreath of mist, in the light
Of the midnight moon?  O, hist!
It is not a wreath of mist;
It is the Czar, the White Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

He has heard, among the dead,
The artillery roll o'erhead;
The drums and the tramp of feet
Of his soldiery in the street;
He is awake! the White Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

He has heard in the grave the cries
Of his people: "Awake! arise!"
He has rent the gold brocade
Whereof his shroud was made;
He is risen! the White Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

From the Volga and the Don
He has led his armies on,
Over river and morass,
Over desert and mountain pass;
The Czar, the Orthodox Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

He looks from the mountain-chain
Toward the seas, that cleave in twain
The continents; his hand
Points southward o'er the land
Of Roumili!  O Czar,
   Batyushka!  Gosudar!

And the words break from his lips:
"I am the builder of ships,
And my ships shall sail these seas
To the Pillars of Hercules!
I say it; the White Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

"The Bosphorus shall be free;
It shall make room for me;
And the gates of its water-streets
Be unbarred before my fleets.
I say it; the White Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!

"And the Christian shall no more
Be crushed, as heretofore,
Beneath thine iron rule,
O Sultan of Istamboul!
I swear it; I the Czar,
    Batyushka!  Gosudar!"



DELIA

Sweet as the tender fragrance that survives,
When martyred flowers breathe out their little lives,
Sweet as a song that once consoled our pain,
But never will be sung to us again,
Is thy remembrance.  Now the hour of rest
Hath come to thee.  Sleep, darling; it is best.



ULTIMA THULE

DEDICATION

TO G.W.G.

With favoring winds, o'er sunlit seas,
We sailed for the Hesperides,
The land where golden apples grow;
But that, ah! that was long ago.

How far, since then, the ocean streams
Have swept us from that land of dreams,
That land of fiction and of truth,
The lost Atlantis of our youth!

Whither, oh, whither?  Are not these
The tempest-haunted Hebrides,
Where sea gulls scream, and breakers roar,
And wreck and sea-weed line the shore?

Ultima Thule!  Utmost Isle!
Here in thy harbors for a while
We lower our sails; a while we rest
From the unending, endless quest.



POEMS

BAYARD TAYLOR

Dead he lay among his books!
The peace of God was in his looks.

As the statues in the gloom
Watch o'er Maximilian's tomb,

So those volumes from their shelves
Watched him, silent as themselves.

Ah! his hand will nevermore
Turn their storied pages o'er;

Nevermore his lips repeat
Songs of theirs, however sweet.

Let the lifeless body rest!
He is gone, who was its guest;

Gone, as travellers haste to leave
An inn, nor tarry until eve.

Traveller! in what realms afar,
In what planet, in what star,

In what vast, aerial space,
Shines the light upon thy face?

In what gardens of delight
Rest thy weary feet to-night?

Poet! thou, whose latest verse
Was a garland on thy hearse;

Thou hast sung, with organ tone,
In Deukalion's life, thine own;

On the ruins of the Past
Blooms the perfect flower at last.

Friend! but yesterday the bells
Rang for thee their loud farewells;

And to-day they toll for thee,
Lying dead beyond the sea;

Lying dead among thy books,
The peace of God in all thy looks!



THE CHAMBER OVER THE GATE

Is it so far from thee
Thou canst no longer see,
In the Chamber over the Gate,
That old man desolate,
Weeping and wailing sore
For his son, who is no more?
    O Absalom, my son!

Is it so long ago
That cry of human woe
From the walled city came,
Calling on his dear name,
That it has died away
In the distance of to-day?
    O Absalom, my son!

There is no far or near,
There is neither there nor here,
There is neither soon nor late,
In that Chamber over the Gate,
Nor any long ago
To that cry of human woe,
    O Absalom, my son!

From the ages that are past
The voice sounds like a blast,
Over seas that wreck and drown,
Over tumult of traffic and town;
And from ages yet to be
Come the echoes back to me,
    O Absalom, my son!

Somewhere at every hour
The watchman on the tower
Looks forth, and sees the fleet
Approach of the hurrying feet
Of messengers, that bear
The tidings of despair.
    O Absalom, my son!

He goes forth from the door
Who shall return no more.
With him our joy departs;
The light goes out in our hearts;
In the Chamber over the Gate
We sit disconsolate.
    O Absalom, my son!

That 't is a common grief
Bringeth but slight relief;
Ours is the bitterest loss,
Ours is the heaviest cross;
And forever the cry will be
"Would God I had died for thee,
    O Absalom, my son!"



FROM MY ARM-CHAIR

TO THE CHILDREN OF CAMBRIDGE

Who presented to me on my Seventy-second Birth-day, February 27,
1879, this Chair, made from the Wood of the Village Blacksmith's
Chestnut Tree.

Am I a king, that I should call my own
     This splendid ebon throne?
Or by what reason, or what right divine,
     Can I proclaim it mine?

Only, perhaps, by right divine of song
     It may to me belong;
Only because the spreading chestnut tree
     Of old was sung by me.

Well I remember it in all its prime,
     When in the summer-time
The affluent foliage of its branches made
     A cavern of cool shade.

There, by the blacksmith's forge, beside the street,
     Its blossoms white and sweet
Enticed the bees, until it seemed alive,
     And murmured like a hive.

And when the winds of autumn, with a shout,
     Tossed its great arms about,
The shining chestnuts, bursting from the sheath,
     Dropped to the ground beneath.

And now some fragments of its branches bare,
     Shaped as a stately chair,
Have by my hearthstone found a home at last,
     And whisper of the past.

The Danish king could not in all his pride
     Repel the ocean tide,
But, seated in this chair, I can in rhyme
     Roll back the tide of Time.

I see again, as one in vision sees,
     The blossoms and the bees,
And hear the children's voices shout and call,
     And the brown chestnuts fall.

I see the smithy with its fires aglow,
     I hear the bellows blow,
And the shrill hammers on the anvil beat
     The iron white with heat!

And thus, dear children, have ye made for me
     This day a jubilee,
And to my more than three-score years and ten
     Brought back my youth again.

The heart hath its own memory, like the mind,
     And in it are enshrined
The precious keepsakes, into which is wrought
     The giver's loving thought.

Only your love and your remembrance could
     Give life to this dead wood,
And make these branches, leafless now so long,
     Blossom again in song.



JUGURTHA

How cold are thy baths, Apollo!
  Cried the African monarch, the splendid,
As down to his death in the hollow
  Dark dungeons of Rome he descended,
  Uncrowned, unthroned, unattended;
How cold are thy baths, Apollo!

How cold are thy baths, Apollo!
  Cried the Poet, unknown, unbefriended,
As the vision, that lured him to follow,
  With the mist and the darkness blended,
  And the dream of his life was ended;
How cold are thy baths, Apollo!



THE IRON PEN

Made from a fetter of Bonnivard, the Prisoner of Chillon; the
handle of wood from the Frigate Constitution, and bound with a
circlet of gold, inset with three precious stones from Siberia,
Ceylon, and Maine.

I thought this Pen would arise
From the casket where it lies--
  Of itself would arise and write
My thanks and my surprise.

When you gave it me under the pines,
I dreamed these gems from the mines
  Of Siberia, Ceylon, and Maine
Would glimmer as thoughts in the lines;

That this iron link from the chain
Of Bonnivard might retain
  Some verse of the Poet who sang
Of the prisoner and his pain;

That this wood from the frigate's mast
Might write me a rhyme at last,
  As it used to write on the sky
The song of the sea and the blast.

But motionless as I wait,
Like a Bishop lying in state
  Lies the Pen, with its mitre of gold,
And its jewels inviolate.

Then must I speak, and say
That the light of that summer day
  In the garden under the pines
Shall not fade and pass away.

I shall see you standing there,
Caressed by the fragrant air,
  With the shadow on your face,
And the sunshine on your hair.

I shall hear the sweet low tone
Of a voice before unknown,
  Saying, "This is from me to you--
From me, and to you alone."

And in words not idle and vain
I shall answer and thank you again
  For the gift, and the grace of the gift,
O beautiful Helen of Maine!

And forever this gift will be
As a blessing from you to me,
  As a drop of the dew of your youth
On the leaves of an aged tree.



ROBERT BURNS

I see amid the fields of Ayr
A ploughman, who, in foul and fair,
      Sings at his task
So clear, we know not if it is
The laverock's song we hear, or his,
      Nor care to ask.

For him the ploughing of those fields
A more ethereal harvest yields
      Than sheaves of grain;
Songs flush with Purple bloom the rye,
The plover's call, the curlew's cry,
      Sing in his brain.

Touched by his hand, the wayside weed
Becomes a flower; the lowliest reed
      Beside the stream
Is clothed with beauty; gorse and grass
And heather, where his footsteps pass,
      The brighter seem.

He sings of love, whose flame illumes
The darkness of lone cottage rooms;
      He feels the force,
The treacherous undertow and stress
Of wayward passions, and no less
      The keen remorse.

At moments, wrestling with his fate,
His voice is harsh, but not with hate;
      The brushwood, hung
Above the tavern door, lets fall
Its bitter leaf, its drop of gall
      Upon his tongue.

But still the music of his song
Rises o'er all elate and strong;
      Its master-chords
Are Manhood, Freedom, Brotherhood,
Its discords but an interlude
      Between the words.

And then to die so young and leave
Unfinished what he might achieve!
      Yet better sure
Is this, than wandering up and down
An old man in a country town,
      Infirm and poor.

For now he haunts his native land
As an immortal youth; his hand
      Guides every plough;
He sits beside each ingle-nook,
His voice is in each rushing brook,
      Each rustling bough.

His presence haunts this room to-night,
A form of mingled mist and light
      From that far coast.
Welcome beneath this roof of mine!
Welcome! this vacant chair is thine,
      Dear guest and ghost!



HELEN OF TYRE

What phantom is this that appears
Through the purple mist of the years,
   Itself but a mist like these?
A woman of cloud and of fire;
It is she; it is Helen of Tyre,
   The town in the midst of the seas.

O Tyre! in thy crowded streets
The phantom appears and retreats,
   And the Israelites that sell
Thy lilies and lions of brass,
Look up as they see her pass,
   And murmur "Jezebel!"

Then another phantom is seen
At her side, in a gray gabardine,
   With beard that floats to his waist;
It is Simon Magus, the Seer;
He speaks, and she pauses to hear
   The words he utters in haste.

He says: "From this evil fame,
From this life of sorrow and shame,
   I will lift thee and make thee mine;
Thou hast been Queen Candace,
And Helen of Troy, and shalt be
   The Intelligence Divine!"

Oh, sweet as the breath of morn,
To the fallen and forlorn
   Are whispered words of praise;
For the famished heart believes
The falsehood that tempts and deceives,
   And the promise that betrays.

So she follows from land to land
The wizard's beckoning hand,
   As a leaf is blown by the gust,
Till she vanishes into night.
O reader, stoop down and write
   With thy finger in the dust.

O town in the midst of the seas,
With thy rafts of cedar trees,
   Thy merchandise and thy ships,
Thou, too, art become as naught,
A phantom, a shadow, a thought,
   A name upon men's lips.



ELEGIAC

Dark is the morning with mist; in the narrow mouth of the harbor
  Motionless lies the sea, under its curtain of cloud;
Dreamily glimmer the sails of ships on the distant horizon,
  Like to the towers of a town, built on the verge of the sea.

Slowly and stately and still, they sail forth into the ocean;
  With them sail my thoughts over the limitless deep,
Farther and farther away, borne on by unsatisfied longings,
  Unto Hesperian isles, unto Ausonian shores.

Now they have vanished away, have disappeared in the ocean;
  Sunk are the towers of the town into the depths of the sea!
AU have vanished but those that, moored in the neighboring
roadstead,
  Sailless at anchor ride, looming so large in the mist.

Vanished, too, are the thoughts, the dim, unsatisfied longings;
  Sunk are the turrets of cloud into the ocean of dreams;
While in a haven of rest my heart is riding at anchor,
  Held by the chains of love, held by the anchors of trust!



OLD ST. DAVID'S AT RADNOR

What an image of peace and rest
  Is this little church among its graves!
All is so quiet; the troubled breast,
The wounded spirit, the heart oppressed,
  Here may find the repose it craves.

See, how the ivy climbs and expands
  Over this humble hermitage,
And seems to caress with its little hands
The rough, gray stones, as a child that stands
  Caressing the wrinkled cheeks of age!

You cross the threshold; and dim and small
  Is the space that serves for the Shepherd's Fold;
The narrow aisle, the bare, white wall,
The pews, and the pulpit quaint and tall,
  Whisper and say: "Alas! we are old."

Herbert's chapel at Bemerton
  Hardly more spacious is than this;
But Poet and Pastor, blent in one,
Clothed with a splendor, as of the sun,
  That lowly and holy edifice.

It is not the wall of stone without
  That makes the building small or great
But the soul's light shining round about,
And the faith that overcometh doubt,
  And the love that stronger is than hate.

Were I a pilgrim in search of peace,
  Were I a pastor of Holy Church,
More than a Bishop's diocese
Should I prize this place of rest, and release
  From farther longing and farther search.

Here would I stay, and let the world
  With its distant thunder roar and roll;
Storms do not rend the sail that is furled;
Nor like a dead leaf, tossed and whirled
  In an eddy of wind, is the anchored soul.



FOLK SONGS

THE SIFTING OF PETER

In St. Luke's Gospel we are told
How Peter in the days of old
      Was sifted;
And now, though ages intervene,
Sin is the same, while time and scene
      Are shifted.

Satan desires us, great and small,
As wheat to sift us, and we all
      Are tempted;
Not one, however rich or great,
Is by his station or estate
      Exempted.

No house so safely guarded is
But he, by some device of his,
      Can enter;
No heart hath armor so complete
But he can pierce with arrows fleet
      Its centre.

For all at last the cock will crow,
Who hear the warning voice, but go
      Unheeding,
Till thrice and more they have denied
The Man of Sorrows, crucified
      And bleeding.

One look of that pale suffering face
Will make us feel the deep disgrace
      Of weakness;
We shall be sifted till the strength
Of self-conceit be changed at length
      To meekness.

Wounds of the soul, though healed will ache;
The reddening scars remain, and make
      Confession;
Lost innocence returns no more;
We are not what we were before
      Transgression.

But noble souls, through dust and heat,
Rise from disaster and defeat
      The stronger,
And conscious still of the divine
Within them, lie on earth supine
      No longer.



MAIDEN AND WEATHERCOCK

MAIDEN
O weathercock on the village spire,
With your golden feathers all on fire,
Tell me, what can you see from your perch
Above there over the tower of the church?

WEATHERCOCK.
I can see the roofs and the streets below,
And the people moving to and fro,
And beyond, without either roof or street,
The great salt sea, and the fisherman's fleet.

I can see a ship come sailing in
Beyond the headlands and harbor of Lynn,
And a young man standing on the deck,
With a silken kerchief round his neck.

Now he is pressing it to his lips,
And now he is kissing his finger-tips,
And now he is lifting and waving his hand
And blowing the kisses toward the land.

MAIDEN.
Ah, that is the ship from over the sea,
That is bringing my lover back to me,
Bringing my lover so fond and true,
Who does not change with the wind like you.

WEATHERCOCK.
If I change with all the winds that blow,
It is only because they made me so,
And people would think it wondrous strange,
If I, a Weathercock, should not change.

O pretty Maiden, so fine and fair,
With your dreamy eyes and your golden hair,
When you and your lover meet to-day
You will thank me for looking some other way.



THE WINDMILL

Behold! a giant am I!
  Aloft here in my tower,
  With my granite jaws I devour
The maize, and the wheat, and the rye,
  And grind them into flour.

I look down over the farms;
  In the fields of grain I see
  The harvest that is to be,
And I fling to the air my arms,
  For I know it is all for me.

I hear the sound of flails
  Far off, from the threshing-floors
  In barns, with their open doors,
And the wind, the wind in my sails,
  Louder and louder roars.

I stand here in my place,
  With my foot on the rock below,
  And whichever way it may blow
I meet it face to face,
  As a brave man meets his foe.

And while we wrestle and strive
  My master, the miller, stands
  And feeds me with his hands;
For he knows who makes him thrive,
  Who makes him lord of lands.

On Sundays I take my rest;
  Church-going bells begin
  Their low, melodious din;
I cross my arms on my breast,
  And all is peace within.



THE TIDE RISES, THE TIDE FALLS

The tide rises, the tide falls,
The twilight darkens, the curlew calls;
Along the sea-sands damp and brown
The traveller hastens toward the town,
   And the tide rises, the tide falls.

Darkness settles on roofs and walls,
But the sea in the darkness calls and calls;
The little waves, with their soft, white hands,
Efface the footprints in the sands,
  And the tide rises, the tide falls.

The morning breaks; the steeds in their stalls
Stamp and neigh, as the hostler calls;
The day returns, but nevermore
Returns the traveller to the shore,
   And the tide rises, the tide falls.



SONNETS

MY CATHEDRAL

Like two cathedral towers these stately pines
  Uplift their fretted summits tipped with cones;
  The arch beneath them is not built with stones,
  Not Art but Nature traced these lovely lines,
And carved this graceful arabesque of vines;
  No organ but the wind here sighs and moans,
  No sepulchre conceals a martyr's bones.
  No marble bishop on his tomb reclines.
Enter! the pavement, carpeted with leaves,
  Gives back a softened echo to thy tread!
  Listen! the choir is singing; all the birds,
In leafy galleries beneath the eaves,
  Are singing! listen, ere the sound be fled,
  And learn there may be worship with out words.



THE BURIAL OF THE POET

RICHARD HENRY DANA

In the old churchyard of his native town,
  And in the ancestral tomb beside the wall,
  We laid him in the sleep that comes to all,
  And left him to his rest and his renown.
The snow was falling, as if Heaven dropped down
  White flowers of Paradise to strew his pall;--
  The dead around him seemed to wake, and call
  His name, as worthy of so white a crown.
And now the moon is shining on the scene,
  And the broad sheet of snow is written o'er
  With shadows cruciform of leafless trees,
As once the winding-sheet of Saladin
  With chapters of the Koran; but, ah! more
  Mysterious and triumphant signs are these.



NIGHT

Into the darkness and the hush of night
  Slowly the landscape sinks, and fades away,
  And with it fade the phantoms of the day,
  The ghosts of men and things, that haunt the light,
The crowd, the clamor, the pursuit, the flight,
  The unprofitable splendor and display,
  The agitations, and the cares that prey
  Upon our hearts, all vanish out of sight.
The better life begins; the world no more
  Molests us; all its records we erase
  From the dull common-place book of our lives,
That like a palimpsest is written o'er
  With trivial incidents of time and place,
  And lo! the ideal, hidden beneath, revives.



L'ENVOI

THE POET AND HIS SONGS

As the birds come in the Spring,
  We know not from where;
As the stars come at evening
  From depths of the air;

As the rain comes from the cloud,
  And the brook from the ground;
As suddenly, low or loud,
  Out of silence a sound;

As the grape comes to the vine,
  The fruit to the tree;
As the wind comes to the pine,
  And the tide to the sea;

As come the white sails of ships
  O'er the ocean's verge;
As comes the smile to the lips,
  The foam to the surge;

So come to the Poet his songs,
  All hitherward blown
From the misty realm, that belongs
  To the vast unknown.

His, and not his, are the lays
  He sings; and their fame
Is his, and not his; and the praise
  And the pride of a name.

For voices pursue him by day,
  And haunt him by night,
And he listens, and needs must obey,
  When the Angel says: "Write!"


***********

IN THE HARBOR

BECALMED

Becalmed upon the sea of Thought,
Still unattained the land it sought,
My mind, with loosely-hanging sails,
Lies waiting the auspicious gales.

On either side, behind, before,
The ocean stretches like a floor,--
A level floor of amethyst,
Crowned by a golden dome of mist.

Blow, breath of inspiration, blow!
Shake and uplift this golden glow!
And fill the canvas of the mind
With wafts of thy celestial wind.

Blow, breath of song! until I feel
The straining sail, the lifting keel,
The life of the awakening sea,
Its motion and its mystery!



THE POET'S CALENDAR

JANUARY

Janus am I; oldest of potentates;
  Forward I look, and backward, and below
I count, as god of avenues and gates,
  The years that through my portals come and go.
I block the roads, and drift the fields with snow;
I chase the wild-fowl from the frozen fen;
My frosts congeal the rivers in their flow,
My fires light up the hearths and hearts of men.


FEBRUARY

I am lustration, and the sea is mine.
  I wash the sands and headlands with my tide;
My brow is crowned with branches of the pine;
  Before my chariot-wheels the fishes glide.
By me all things unclean are purified,
  By me the souls of men washed white again;
E'en the unlovely tombs of those who died
  Without a dirge, I cleanse from every stain.


MARCH

I Martius am!  Once first, and now the third!
  To lead the Year was my appointed place;
A mortal dispossessed me by a word,
  And set there Janus with the double face.
Hence I make war on all the human race;
  I shake the cities with my hurricanes;
I flood the rivers and their banks efface,
  And drown the farms and hamlets with my rains.


APRIL

I open wide the portals of the Spring
  To welcome the procession of the flowers,
With their gay banners, and the birds that sing
  Their song of songs from their aerial towers.
I soften with my sunshine and my showers
  The heart of earth; with thoughts of love I glide
Into the hearts of men; and with the Hours
  Upon the Bull with wreathed horns I ride.


MAY

Hark!  The sea-faring wild-fowl loud proclaim
  My coming, and the swarming of the bees.
These are my heralds, and behold! my name
  Is written in blossoms on the hawthorn-trees.
I tell the mariner when to sail the seas;
  I waft o'er all the land from far away
The breath and bloom of the Hesperides,
  My birthplace.  I am Maia.  I am May.


JUNE

Mine is the Month of Roses; yes, and mine
  The Month of Marriages!  All pleasant sights
And scents, the fragrance of the blossoming vine,
  The foliage of the valleys and the heights.
Mine are the longest days, the loveliest nights;
  The mower's scythe makes music to my ear;
I am the mother of all dear delights;
  I am the fairest daughter of the year.


JULY

My emblem is the Lion, and I breathe
  The breath of Libyan deserts o'er the land;
My sickle as a sabre I unsheathe,
  And bent before me the pale harvests stand.
The lakes and rivers shrink at my command,
  And there is thirst and fever in the air;
The sky is changed to brass, the earth to sand;
  I am the Emperor whose name I bear.


AUGUST

The Emperor Octavian, called the August,
  I being his favorite, bestowed his name
Upon me, and I hold it still in trust,
  In memory of him and of his fame.
I am the Virgin, and my vestal flame
  Burns less intensely than the Lion's rage;
Sheaves are my only garlands, and I claim
  The golden Harvests as my heritage.


SEPTEMBER

I bear the Scales, where hang in equipoise
  The night and day; and when unto my lips
I put my trumpet, with its stress and noise
  Fly the white clouds like tattered sails of ships;
The tree-tops lash the air with sounding whips;
  Southward the clamorous sea-fowl wing their flight;
The hedges are all red with haws and hips,
  The Hunter's Moon reigns empress of the night.


OCTOBER

My ornaments are fruits; my garments leaves,
  Woven like cloth of gold, and crimson dyed;
I do not boast the harvesting of sheaves,
  O'er orchards and o'er vineyards I preside.
Though on the frigid Scorpion I ride,
  The dreamy air is full, and overflows
With tender memories of the summer-tide,
  And mingled voices of the doves and crows.

NOVEMBER

The Centaur, Sagittarius, am I,
  Born of Ixion's and the cloud's embrace;
With sounding hoofs across the earth I fly,
  A steed Thessalian with a human face.
Sharp winds the arrows are with which I chase
  The leaves, half dead already with affright;
I shroud myself in gloom; and to the race
  Of mortals bring nor comfort nor delight.


DECEMBER

Riding upon the Goat, with snow-white hair,
  I come, the last of all.  This crown of mine
Is of the holly; in my hand I bear
  The thyrsus, tipped with fragrant cones of pine.
I celebrate the birth of the Divine,
  And the return of the Saturnian reign;--
My songs are carols sung at every shrine,
  Proclaiming "Peace on earth, good will to men."



AUTUMN WITHIN

It is autumn; not without,
  But within me is the cold.
Youth and spring are all about;
  It is I that have grown old.

Birds are darting through the air,
  Singing, building without rest;
Life is stirring everywhere,
  Save within my lonely breast.

There is silence: the dead leaves
  Fall and rustle and are still;
Beats no flail upon the sheaves
  Comes no murmur from the mill.



THE FOUR LAKES OF MADISON

Four limpid lakes,--four Naiades
Or sylvan deities are these,
  In flowing robes of azure dressed;
Four lovely handmaids, that uphold
Their shining mirrors, rimmed with gold,
  To the fair city in the West.

By day the coursers of the sun
Drink of these waters as they run
  Their swift diurnal round on high;
By night the constellations glow
Far down the hollow deeps below,
  And glimmer in another sky.

Fair lakes, serene and full of light,
Fair town, arrayed in robes of white,
  How visionary ye appear!
All like a floating landscape seems
In cloud-land or the land of dreams,
  Bathed in a golden atmosphere!



VICTOR AND VANQUISHED

As one who long hath fled with panting breath
  Before his foe, bleeding and near to fall,
  I turn and set my back against the wall,
  And look thee in the face, triumphant Death,
I call for aid, and no one answereth;
  I am alone with thee, who conquerest all;
  Yet me thy threatening form doth not appall,
  For thou art but a phantom and a wraith.
Wounded and weak, sword broken at the hilt,
  With armor shattered, and without a shield,
  I stand unmoved; do with me what thou wilt;
I can resist no more, but will not yield.
  This is no tournament where cowards tilt;
  The vanquished here is victor of the field.



MOONLIGHT

As a pale phantom with a lamp
  Ascends some ruin's haunted stair,
So glides the moon along the damp
  Mysterious chambers of the air.

Now hidden in cloud, and now revealed,
  As if this phantom, full of pain,
Were by the crumbling walls concealed,
  And at the windows seen again.

Until at last, serene and proud
  In all the splendor of her light,
She walks the terraces of cloud,
  Supreme as Empress of the Night.

I look, but recognize no more
  Objects familiar to my view;
The very pathway to my door
  Is an enchanted avenue.

All things are changed.  One mass of shade,
  The elm-trees drop their curtains down;
By palace, park, and colonnade
  I walk as in a foreign town.

The very ground beneath my feet
  Is clothed with a diviner air;
White marble paves the silent street
  And glimmers in the empty square.

Illusion!  Underneath there lies
  The common life of every day;
Only the spirit glorifies
  With its own tints the sober gray.

In vain we look, in vain uplift
  Our eyes to heaven, if we are blind,
We see but what we have the gift
  Of seeing; what we bring we find.



THE CHILDREN'S CRUSADE

[A FRAGMENT.]

I

What is this I read in history,
Full of marvel, full of mystery,
Difficult to understand?
Is it fiction, is it truth?
Children in the flower of youth,
Heart in heart, and hand in hand,
Ignorant of what helps or harms,
Without armor, without arms,
Journeying to the Holy Land!

Who shall answer or divine?
Never since the world was made
Such a wonderful crusade
Started forth for Palestine.
Never while the world shall last
Will it reproduce the past;
Never will it see again
Such an army, such a band,
Over mountain, over main,
Journeying to the Holy Land.

Like a shower of blossoms blown
From the parent trees were they;
Like a flock of birds that fly
Through the unfrequented sky,
Holding nothing as their own,
Passed they into lands unknown,
Passed to suffer and to die.

O the simple, child-like trust!
O the faith that could believe
What the harnessed, iron-mailed
Knights of Christendom had failed,
By their prowess, to achieve,
They the children, could and must?

Little thought the Hermit, preaching
Holy Wars to knight and baron,
That the words dropped in his teaching,
His entreaty, his beseeching,
Would by children's hands be gleaned,
And the staff on which he leaned
Blossom like the rod of Aaron.

As a summer wind upheaves
The innumerable leaves
In the bosom of a wood,--
Not as separate leaves, but massed
All together by the blast,--
So for evil or for good
His resistless breath upheaved
All at once the many-leaved,
Many-thoughted multitude.

In the tumult of the air
Rock the boughs with all the nests
Cradled on their tossing crests;
By the fervor of his prayer
Troubled hearts were everywhere
Rocked and tossed in human breasts.

For a century, at least,
His prophetic voice had ceased;
But the air was heated still
By his lurid words and will,
As from fires in far-off woods,
In the autumn of the year,
An unwonted fever broods
In the sultry atmosphere.


II

In Cologne the bells were ringing,
In Cologne the nuns were singing
Hymns and canticles divine;
Loud the monks sang in their stalls,
And the thronging streets were loud
With the voices of the crowd;--
Underneath the city walls
Silent flowed the river Rhine.

From the gates, that summer day,
Clad in robes of hodden gray,
With the red cross on the breast,
Azure-eyed and golden-haired,
Forth the young crusaders fared;
While above the band devoted
Consecrated banners floated,
Fluttered many a flag and streamer,
And the cross o'er all the rest!
Singing lowly, meekly, slowly,
"Give us, give us back the holy
Sepulchre of the Redeemer!"
On the vast procession pressed,
Youths and maidens. . . .


III

Ah! what master hand shall paint
How they journeyed on their way,
How the days grew long and dreary,
How their little feet grew weary,
How their little hearts grew faint!

Ever swifter day by day
Flowed the homeward river; ever
More and more its whitening current
Broke and scattered into spray,
Till the calmly-flowing river
Changed into a mountain torrent,
Rushing from its glacier green
Down through chasm and black ravine.
Like a phoenix in its nest,
Burned the red sun in the West,
Sinking in an ashen cloud;
In the East, above the crest
Of the sea-like mountain chain,
Like a phoenix from its shroud,
Came the red sun back again.

Now around them, white with snow,
Closed the mountain peaks.  Below,
Headlong from the precipice
Down into the dark abyss,
Plunged the cataract, white with foam;
And it said, or seemed to say:
"Oh return, while yet you may,
Foolish children, to your home,
There the Holy City is!"

But the dauntless leader said:
"Faint not, though your bleeding feet
O'er these slippery paths of sleet
Move but painfully and slowly;
Other feet than yours have bled;
Other tears than yours been shed
Courage! lose not heart or hope;
On the mountains' southern slope
Lies Jerusalem the Holy!"

As a white rose in its pride,
By the wind in summer-tide
Tossed and loosened from the branch,
Showers its petals o'er the ground,
From the distant mountain's side,
Scattering all its snows around,
With mysterious, muffled sound,
Loosened, fell the avalanche.
Voices, echoes far and near,
Roar of winds and waters blending,
Mists uprising, clouds impending,
Filled them with a sense of fear,
Formless, nameless, never ending.

. . . . . . . . . .



SUNDOWN

The summer sun is sinking low;
Only the tree-tops redden and glow:
Only the weathercock on the spire
Of the neighboring church is a flame of fire;
     All is in shadow below.

O beautiful, awful summer day,
What hast thou given, what taken away?
Life and death, and love and hate,
Homes made happy or desolate,
     Hearts made sad or gay!

On the road of life one mile-stone more!
In the book of life one leaf turned o'er!
Like a red seal is the setting sun
On the good and the evil men have done,--
     Naught can to-day restore!



CHIMES

Sweet chimes! that in the loneliness of night
  Salute the passing hour, and in the dark
  And silent chambers of the household mark
  The movements of the myriad orbs of light!
Through my closed eyelids, by the inner sight,
  I see the constellations in the arc
  Of their great circles moving on, and hark!
  I almost hear them singing in their flight.
Better than sleep it is to lie awake
  O'er-canopied by the vast starry dome
  Of the immeasurable sky; to feel
The slumbering world sink under us, and make
  Hardly an eddy,--a mere rush of foam
  On the great sea beneath a sinking keel.



FOUR BY THE CLOCK.

"NAHANT, September 8, 1880,
Four o'clock in the morning."

Four by the clock! and yet not day;
But the great world rolls and wheels away,
With its cities on land, and its ships at sea,
Into the dawn that is to be!

Only the lamp in the anchored bark
Sends its glimmer across the dark,
And the heavy breathing of the sea
Is the only sound that comes to me.



AUF WIEDERSEHEN.

IN MEMORY OF J.T.F.

Until we meet again!  That is the meaning
Of the familiar words, that men repeat
    At parting in the street.
Ah yes, till then! but when death intervening
Rends us asunder, with what ceaseless pain
    We wait for the Again!

The friends who leave us do not feel the sorrow
Of parting, as we feel it, who must stay
    Lamenting day by day,
And knowing, when we wake upon the morrow,
We shall not find in its accustomed place
    The one beloved face.

It were a double grief, if the departed,
Being released from earth, should still retain
    A sense of earthly pain;
It were a double grief, if the true-hearted,
Who loved us here, should on the farther shore
    Remember us no more.

Believing, in the midst of our afflictions,
That death is a beginning, not an end,
    We cry to them, and send
Farewells, that better might be called predictions,
Being fore-shadowings of the future, thrown
    Into the vast Unknown.

Faith overleaps the confines of our reason,
And if by faith, as in old times was said,
    Women received their dead
Raised up to life, then only for a season
Our partings are, nor shall we wait in vain
    Until we meet again!



ELEGIAC VERSE

I

Peradventure of old, some bard in Ionian Islands,
  Walking alone by the sea, hearing the wash of the waves,
Learned the secret from them of the beautiful verse elegiac,
  Breathing into his song motion and sound of the sea.

For as the wave of the sea, upheaving in long undulations,
  Plunges loud on the sands, pauses, and turns, and retreats,
So the Hexameter, rising and singing, with cadence sonorous,
  Falls; and in refluent rhythm back the Pentameter flows?

II

Not in his youth alone, but in age, may the heart of the poet
  Bloom into song, as the gorse blossoms in autumn and spring.

III

Not in tenderness wanting, yet rough are the rhymes of our poet;
  Though it be Jacob's voice, Esau's, alas! are the hands.

IV

Let us be grateful to writers for what is left in the inkstand;
  When to leave off is an art only attained by the few.

V

How can the Three be One? you ask me; I answer by asking,
  Hail and snow and rain, are they not three, and yet one?

VI

By the mirage uplifted the land floats vague in the ether,
  Ships and the shadows of ships hang in the motionless air;
So by the art of the poet our common life is uplifted,
  So, transfigured, the world floats in a luminous haze.

VII

Like a French poem is Life; being only perfect in structure
  When with the masculine rhymes mingled the feminine are.

VIII

Down from the mountain descends the brooklet, rejoicing in
freedom;
   Little it dreams of the mill hid in the valley below;
Glad with the joy of existence, the child goes singing and
laughing,
  Little dreaming what toils lie in the future concealed.

IX

As the ink from our pen, so flow our thoughts and our feelings
  When we begin to write, however sluggish before.

X

Like the Kingdom of Heaven, the Fountain of Youth is within us;
  If we seek it elsewhere, old shall we grow in the search.

XI

If you would hit the mark, you must aim a little above it;
  Every arrow that flies feels the attraction of earth.

XII

Wisely the Hebrews admit no Present tense in their language;
  While we are speaking the word, it is is already the Past.

XIII

In the twilight of age all things seem strange and phantasmal,
  As between daylight and dark ghost-like the landscape appears.

XIV

Great is the art of beginning, but greater the art is of ending;
  Many a poem is marred by a superfluous verse.



THE CITY AND THE SEA

The panting City cried to the Sea,
"I am faint with heat,--O breathe on me!"

And the Sea said, "Lo, I breathe! but my breath
To some will be life, to others death!"

As to Prometheus, bringing ease
In pain, come the Oceanides,

So to the City, hot with the flame
Of the pitiless sun, the east wind came.

It came from the heaving breast of the deep,
Silent as dreams are, and sudden as sleep.

Life-giving, death-giving, which will it be;
O breath of the merciful, merciless Sea?



MEMORIES

Oft I remember those whom I have known
  In other days, to whom my heart was led
  As by a magnet, and who are not dead,
  But absent, and their memories overgrown
With other thoughts and troubles of my own,
  As graves with grasses are, and at their head
  The stone with moss and lichens so o'erspread,
  Nothing is legible but the name alone.
And is it so with them?  After long years,
  Do they remember me in the same way,
  And is the memory pleasant as to me?
I fear to ask; yet wherefore are my fears?
  Pleasures, like flowers, may wither and decay,
  And yet the root perennial may be.



HERMES TRISMEGISTUS

As Seleucus narrates, Hermes describes the principles that rank
as wholes in two myriads of books; or, as we are informed by
Manetho, he perfectly unfolded these principles in three myriads
six thousand five hundred and twenty-five volumes. . . .
 . . . Our ancestors dedicated the inventions of  their wisdom to
this deity, inscribing all their own writings with the name of
Hermes.--IAMBLICUS.

Still through Egypt's desert places
    Flows the lordly Nile,
From its banks the great stone faces
    Gaze with patient smile.
Still the pyramids imperious
    Pierce the cloudless skies,
And the Sphinx stares with mysterious,
    Solemn, stony eyes.

But where are the old Egyptian
    Demi-gods and kings?
Nothing left but an inscription
    Graven on stones and rings.
Where are Helios and Hephaestus,
    Gods of eldest eld?
Where is Hermes Trismegistus,
    Who their secrets held?

Where are now the many hundred
    Thousand books he wrote?
By the Thaumaturgists plundered,
    Lost in lands remote;
In oblivion sunk forever,
    As when o'er the land
Blows a storm-wind, in the river
   Sinks the scattered sand.

Something unsubstantial, ghostly,
    Seems this Theurgist,
In deep meditation mostly
    Wrapped, as in a mist.
Vague, phantasmal, and unreal
    To our thought he seems,
Walking in a world ideal,
    In a land of dreams.

Was he one, or many, merging
    Name and fame in one,
Like a stream, to which, converging
    Many streamlets run?
Till, with gathered power proceeding,
    Ampler sweep it takes,
Downward the sweet waters leading
    From unnumbered lakes.

By the Nile I see him wandering,
    Pausing now and then,
On the mystic union pondering
    Between gods and men;
Half believing, wholly feeling,
    With supreme delight,
How the gods, themselves concealing,
    Lift men to their height.

Or in Thebes, the hundred-gated,
    In the thoroughfare
Breathing, as if consecrated,
    A diviner air;
And amid discordant noises,
    In the jostling throng,
Hearing far, celestial voices
    Of Olympian song.

Who shall call his dreams fallacious?
    Who has searched or sought
All the unexplored and spacious
    Universe of thought?
Who, in his own skill confiding,
   Shall with rule and line
Mark the border-land dividing
    Human and divine?

Trismegistus! three times greatest!
    How thy name sublime
Has descended to this latest
    Progeny of time!
Happy they whose written pages
    Perish with their lives,
If amid the crumbling ages
    Still their name survives!

Thine, O priest of Egypt, lately
    Found I in the vast,
Weed-encumbered sombre, stately,
    Grave-yard of the Past;
And a presence moved before me
    On that gloomy shore,
As a waft of wind, that o'er me
    Breathed, and was no more.



TO THE AVON

Flow on, sweet river! like his verse
Who lies beneath this sculptured hearse
Nor wait beside the churchyard wall
For him who cannot hear thy call.

Thy playmate once; I see him now
A boy with sunshine on his brow,
And hear in Stratford's quiet street
The patter of his little feet.

I see him by thy shallow edge
Wading knee-deep amid the sedge;
And lost in thought, as if thy stream
Were the swift river of a dream.

He wonders whitherward it flows;
And fain would follow where it goes,
To the wide world, that shall erelong
Be filled with his melodious song.

Flow on, fair stream!  That dream is o'er;
He stands upon another shore;
A vaster river near him flows,
And still he follows where it goes.



PRESIDENT GARFIELD

"E venni dal martirio a questa pace."

These words the poet heard in Paradise,
  Uttered by one who, bravely dying here,
  In the true faith was living in that sphere
  Where the celestial cross of sacrifice
Spread its protecting arms athwart the skies;
  And set thereon, like jewels crystal clear,
  The souls magnanimous, that knew not fear,
  Flashed their effulgence on his dazzled eyes.
Ah me! how dark the discipline of pain,
  Were not the suffering followed by the sense
  Of infinite rest and infinite release!
This is our consolation; and again
  A great soul cries to us in our suspense,
  "I came from martyrdom unto this peace!"



MY BOOKS

Sadly as some old mediaeval knight
  Gazed at the arms he could no longer wield,
  The sword two-handed and the shining shield
  Suspended in the hall, and full in sight,
While secret longings for the lost delight
  Of tourney or adventure in the field
  Came over him, and tears but half concealed
  Trembled and fell upon his beard of white,
So I behold these books upon their shelf,
  My ornaments and arms of other days;
  Not wholly useless, though no longer used,
For they remind me of my other self,
  Younger and stronger, and the pleasant ways
  In which I walked, now clouded and confused.



MAD RIVER

IN THE WHITE MOUNTAINS

TRAVELLER
Why dost thou wildly rush and roar,
     Mad River, O Mad River?
Wilt thou not pause and cease to pour
Thy hurrying, headlong waters o'er
     This rocky shelf forever?

What secret trouble stirs thy breast?
     Why all this fret and flurry?
Dost thou not know that what is best
In this too restless world is rest
     From over-work and worry?

THE RIVER
What wouldst thou in these mountains seek,
     O stranger from the city?
Is it perhaps some foolish freak
Of thine, to put the words I speak
     Into a plaintive ditty?

TRAVELLER
Yes; I would learn of thee thy song,
     With all its flowing number;
And in a voice as fresh and strong
As thine is, sing it all day long,
     And hear it in my slumbers.

THE RIVER
A brooklet nameless and unknown
     Was I at first, resembling
A little child, that all alone
Comes venturing down the stairs of stone,
     Irresolute and trembling.

Later, by wayward fancies led,
     For the wide world I panted;
Out of the forest dark and dread
Across the open fields I fled,
     Like one pursued and haunted.

I tossed my arms, I sang aloud,
     My voice exultant blending
With thunder from the passing cloud,
The wind, the forest bent and bowed,
     The rush of rain descending.

I heard the distant ocean call,
     Imploring and entreating;
Drawn onward, o'er this rocky wall
I plunged, and the loud waterfall
     Made answer to the greeting.

And now, beset with many ills,
     A toilsome life I follow;
Compelled to carry from the hills
These logs to the impatient mills
     Below there in the hollow.

Yet something ever cheers and charms
     The rudeness of my labors;
Daily I water with these arms
The cattle of a hundred farms,
     And have the birds for neighbors.

Men call me Mad, and well they may,
     When, full of rage and trouble,
I burst my banks of sand and clay,
And sweep their wooden bridge away,
     Like withered reeds or stubble.

Now go and write thy little rhyme,
     As of thine own creating.
Thou seest the day is past its prime;
I can no longer waste my time;
     The mills are tired of waiting.



POSSIBILITIES

Where are the Poets, unto whom belong
  The Olympian heights; whose singing shafts were sent
  Straight to the mark, and not from bows half bent,
  But with the utmost tension of the thong?
Where are the stately argosies of song,
  Whose rushing keels made music as they went
  Sailing in search of some new continent,
  With all sail set, and steady winds and strong?
Perhaps there lives some dreamy boy, untaught
  In schools, some graduate of the field or street,
  Who shall become a master of the art,
An admiral sailing the high seas of thought,
  Fearless and first and steering with his fleet
  For lands not yet laid down in any chart.



DECORATION DAY

Sleep, comrades, sleep and rest
  On this Field of the Grounded Arms,
Where foes no more molest,
  Nor sentry's shot alarms!

Ye have slept on the ground before,
  And started to your feet
At the cannon's sudden roar,
  Or the drum's redoubling beat.

But in this camp of Death
  No sound your slumber breaks;
Here is no fevered breath,
  No wound that bleeds and aches.

All is repose and peace,
  Untrampled lies the sod;
The shouts of battle cease,
  It is the Truce of God!

Rest, comrades, rest and sleep!
  The thoughts of men shall be
As sentinels to keep
  Your rest from danger free.

Your silent tents of green
  We deck with fragrant flowers;
Yours has the suffering been,
  The memory shall be ours.



A FRAGMENT

Awake! arise! the hour is late!
  Angels are knocking at thy door!
They are in haste and cannot wait,
  And once departed come no more.

Awake! arise! the athlete's arm
  Loses its strength by too much rest;
The fallow land, the untilled farm
  Produces only weeds at best.



LOSS AND GAIN
     When I compare
What I have lost with what I have gained,
What I have missed with what attained,
  Little room do I find for pride.

     I am aware
How many days have been idly spent;
How like an arrow the good intent
  Has fallen short or been turned aside.

     But who shall dare
To measure loss and gain in this wise?
Defeat may be victory in disguise;
  The lowest ebb is the turn of the tide.



INSCRIPTION ON THE SHANKLIN FOUNTAIN

O traveller, stay thy weary feet;
Drink of this fountain, pure and sweet;
  It flows for rich and poor the same.
Then go thy way, remembering still
The wayside well beneath the hill,
  The cup of water in His name.



THE BELLS OF SAN BLAS

What say the Bells of San Blas
To the ships that southward pass
  From the harbor of Mazatlan?
To them it is nothing more
Than the sound of surf on the shore,--
  Nothing more to master or man.

But to me, a dreamer of dreams,
To whom what is and what seems
  Are often one and the same,--
The Bells of San Blas to me
Have a strange, wild melody,
  And are something more than a name.

For bells are the voice of the church;
They have tones that touch and search
  The hearts of young and old;
One sound to all, yet each
Lends a meaning to their speech,
  And the meaning is manifold.

They are a voice of the Past,
Of an age that is fading fast,
  Of a power austere and grand,
When the flag of Spain unfurled
Its folds o'er this western world,
  And the Priest was lord of the land.

The chapel that once looked down
On the little seaport town
  Has crumbled into the dust;
And on oaken beams below
The bells swing to and fro,
  And are green with mould and rust.

"Is, then, the old faith dead,"
They say, "and in its stead
  Is some new faith proclaimed,
That we are forced to remain
Naked to sun and rain,
  Unsheltered and ashamed?

"Once, in our tower aloof,
We rang over wall and roof
  Our warnings and our complaints;
And round about us there
The white doves filled the air,
  Like the white souls of the saints.

"The saints!  Ah, have they grown
Forgetful of their own?
  Are they asleep, or dead,
That open to the sky
Their ruined Missions lie,
  No longer tenanted?

"Oh, bring us back once more
The vanished days of yore,
  When the world with faith was filled;
Bring back the fervid zeal,
The hearts of fire and steel,
  The hands that believe and build.

"Then from our tower again
We will send over land and main
  Our voices of command,
Like exiled kings who return
To their thrones, and the people learn
  That the Priest is lord of the land!"

O Bells of San Blas in vain
Ye call back the Past again;
  The Past is deaf to your prayer!
Out of the shadows of night
The world rolls into light;
  It is daybreak everywhere.


*************


FRAGMENTS

October 22, 1838.

Neglected record of a mind neglected,
Unto what "lets and stops" art thou subjected!
The day with all its toils and occupations,
The night with its reflections and sensations,
The future, and the present, and the past,--
All I remember, feel, and hope at last,
All shapes of joy and sorrow, as they pass,--
Find but a dusty image in this glass.

August 18, 1847.

O faithful, indefatigable tides,
That evermore upon God's errands go,--
Now seaward bearing tidings of the land,--
Now landward bearing tidings of the sea,--
And filling every frith and estuary,
Each arm of the great sea, each little creek,
Each thread and filament of water-courses,
Full with your ministration of delight!
Under the rafters of this wooden bridge
I see you come and go; sometimes in haste
To reach your journey's end, which being done
With feet unrested ye return again
And recommence the never-ending task;
Patient, whatever burdens ye may bear,
And fretted only by the impeding rocks.

December 18, 1847.

Soft through the silent air descend the feathery snow-flakes;
White are the distant hills, white are the neighboring fields;
Only the marshes are brown, and the river rolling among them
Weareth the leaden hue seen in the eyes of the blind.

August 4, 1856.

A lovely morning, without the glare of the sun, the sea in great
commotion, chafing and foaming.

So from the bosom of darkness our days come roaring and gleaming,
  Chafe and break into foam, sink into darkness again.
But on the shores of Time each leaves some trace of its passage,
  Though the succeeding wave washes it out from the sand.


********


CHRISTUS: A MYSTERY

INTROITUS

The ANGEL bearing the PROPHET HABAKKUK through the air.

PROPHET.
Why dost thou bear me aloft,
O Angel of God, on thy pinions
O'er realms and dominions?
Softly I float as a cloud
In air, for thy right hand upholds me,
Thy garment enfolds me!

ANGEL.
Lo! as I passed on my way
In the harvest-field I beheld thee,
When no man compelled thee,
Bearing with thine own hands
This food to the famishing reapers,
A flock without keepers!

The fragrant sheaves of the wheat
Made the air above them sweet;
Sweeter and more divine
Was the scent of the scattered grain,
That the reaper's hand let fall
To be gathered again
By the hand of the gleaner!
Sweetest, divinest of all,
Was the humble deed of thine,
And the meekness of thy demeanor!

PROPHET.
Angel of Light,
I cannot gainsay thee,
I can but obey thee!

ANGEL.
Beautiful was it in the lord's sight,
To behold his Prophet
Feeding those that toil,
The tillers of the soil.
But why should the reapers eat of it
And not the Prophet of Zion
In the den of the lion?
The Prophet should feed the Prophet!
Therefore I thee have uplifted,
And bear thee aloft by the hair
Of thy head, like a cloud that is drifted
Through the vast unknown of the air!
Five days hath the Prophet been lying
In Babylon, in the den
Of the lions, death-defying,
Defying hunger and thirst;
But the worst
Is the mockery of men!
Alas! how full of fear
Is the fate of Prophet and Seer!
Forevermore, forevermore,
It shall be as it hath been heretofore;
The age in which they live
Will not forgive
The splendor of the everlasting light,
That makes their foreheads bright,
Nor the sublime
Fore-running of their time!

PROPHET.
Oh tell me, for thou knowest,
Wherefore and by what grace,
Have I, who am least and lowest,
Been chosen to this place,
To this exalted part?

ANGEL.
Because thou art
The Struggler; and from thy youth
Thy humble and patient life
Hath been a strife
And battle for the Truth;
Nor hast thou paused nor halted,
Nor ever in thy pride
Turned from the poor aside,
But with deed and word and pen
Hast served thy fellow-men;
Therefore art thou exalted!

PROPHET.
By thine arrow's light
Thou goest onward through the night,
And by the clear
Sheen of thy glittering spear!
When will our journey end?

ANGEL.
Lo, it is ended!
Yon silver gleam
Is the Euphrates' stream.
Let us descend
Into the city splendid,
Into the City of Gold!

PROPHET.
Behold!
As if the stars had fallen from their places
Into the firmament below,
The streets, the gardens, and the vacant spaces
With light are all aglow;
And hark!
As we draw near,
What sound is it I hear
Ascending through the dark?

ANGEL.
The tumultuous noise of the nations,
Their rejoicings and lamentations,
The pleadings of their prayer,
The groans of their despair,
The cry of their imprecations,
Their wrath, their love, their hate!

PROPHET.
Surely the world doth wait
The coming of its Redeemer!

ANGEL.
Awake from thy sleep, O dreamer?
The hour is near, though late;
Awake! write the vision sublime,
The vision, that is for a time,
Though it tarry, wait; it is nigh;
In the end it will speak and not lie.



PART ONE

THE DIVINE TRAGEDY

THE FIRST PASSOVER

I

VOX CLAMANTIS

JOHN THE BAPTIST.
Repent! repent! repent!
For the kingdom of God is at hand,
And all the land
Full of the knowledge of the Lord shall be
As the waters cover the sea,
And encircle the continent!

Repent! repent! repent!
For lo, the hour appointed,
The hour so long foretold
By the Prophets of old,
Of the coming of the Anointed,
The Messiah, the Paraclete,
The Desire of the Nations, is nigh!
He shall not strive nor cry,
Nor his voice be heard in the street;
Nor the bruised reed shall He break,
Nor quench the smoking flax;
And many of them that sleep
In the dust of earth shall awake,
On that great and terrible day,
And the wicked shall wail and weep,
And be blown like a smoke away,
And be melted away like wax.
Repent! repent! repent!

O Priest, and Pharisee,
Who hath warned you to flee
From the wrath that is to be?
From the coming anguish and ire?
The axe is laid at the root
Of the trees, and every tree
That bringeth not forth good fruit
Is hewn down and cast into the fire!

Ye Scribes, why come ye hither?
In the hour that is uncertain,
In the day of anguish and trouble,
He that stretcheth the heavens as a curtain
And spreadeth them out as a tent,
Shall blow upon you, and ye shall wither,
And the whirlwind shall take you away as stubble!
Repent! repent! repent!

PRIEST.
Who art thou, O man of prayer!
In raiment of camel's hair,
Begirt with leathern thong,
That here in the wilderness,
With a cry as of one in distress,
Preachest unto this throng?
Art thou the Christ?

JOHN.
Priest of Jerusalem,
In meekness and humbleness,
I deny not, I confess
I am not the Christ!

PRIEST.
What shall we say unto them
That sent us here?  Reveal
Thy name, and naught conceal!
Art thou Elias?

JOHN.
                No!

PRIEST.
Art thou that Prophet, then,
Of lamentation and woe,
Who, as a symbol and sign
Of impending wrath divine
Upon unbelieving men,
Shattered the vessel of clay
In the Valley of Slaughter?

JOHN.
                            Nay.
I am not he thou namest!

PRIEST.
Who art thou, and what is the word
That here thou proclaimest?

JOHN.
I am the voice of one
Crying in the wilderness alone:
Prepare ye the way of the Lord;
Make his paths straight
In the land that is desolate!

PRIEST.
If thou be not the Christ,
Nor yet Elias, nor he
That, in sign of the things to be,
Shattered the vessel of clay
In the Valley of Slaughter,
Then declare unto us, and say
By what authority now
Baptizest thou?

JOHN.
I indeed baptize you with water
Unto repentance; but He,
That cometh after me,
Is mightier than I and higher;
The latchet of whose shoes
I an not worthy to unloose;
He shall baptize you with fire,
And with the Holy Ghost!
Whose fan is in his hand;
He will purge to the uttermost
His floor, and garner his wheat,
But will burn the chaff in the brand
And fire of unquenchable heat!
Repent! repent! repent!


II

MOUNT QUARANTANIA


I

LUCIFER.
Not in the lightning's flash, nor in the thunder,
Not in the tempest, nor the cloudy storm,
    Will I array my form;
But part invisible these boughs asunder,
And move and murmur as the wind upheaves
    And whispers in the leaves.

Not as a terror and a desolation,
Not in my natural shape, inspiring fear
    And dread, will I appear;
But in soft tones of sweetness and persuasion,
A sound as of the fall of mountain streams,
    Or voices heard in dreams.

He sitteth there in silence, worn and wasted
With famine, and uplifts his hollow eyes
    To the unpitying skies;
For forty days and nights he hath not tasted
Of food or drink, his parted lips are pale,
    Surely his strength must fail.

Wherefore dost thou in penitential fasting
Waste and consume the beauty of thy youth.
    Ah, if thou be in truth
The Son of the Unnamed, the Everlasting,
Command these stones beneath thy feet to be
    Changed into bread for thee!

CHRISTUS.
'T is written!  Man shall not live by bread alone,
But by each word that from God's mouth proceedeth!


II

LUCIFER.
Too weak, alas! too weak is the temptation
For one whose soul to nobler things aspires
    Than sensual desires!
Ah, could I, by some sudden aberration,
Lend and delude to suicidal death
    This Christ of Nazareth!

Unto the holy Temple on Moriah,
With its resplendent domes, and manifold
    Bright pinnacles of gold,
Where they await thy coming, O Messiah!
Lo, I have brought thee!  Let thy glory here
    Be manifest and clear.

Reveal thyself by royal act and gesture
Descending with the bright triumphant host
    Of all the hithermost
Archangels, and about thee as a vesture
The shining clouds, and all thy splendors show
    Unto the world below!

Cast thyself down, it is the hour appointed;
And God hath given his angels charge and care
    To keep thee and upbear
Upon their hands his only Son, the Anointed,
Lest he should dash his foot against a stone
    And die, and be unknown.

CHRISTUS.
'T is written: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God!


III

LUCIFER.
I cannot thus delude him to perdition!
But one temptation still remains untried,
    The trial of his pride,
The thirst of power, the fever of ambition!
Surely by these a humble peasant's son
    At last may be undone!

Above the yawning chasms and deep abysses,
Across the headlong torrents, I have brought
    Thy footsteps, swift as thought;
And from the highest of these precipices,
The Kingdoms of the world thine eyes behold.
    Like a great map unrolled.

From far-off Lebanon, with cedars crested,
To where the waters of the Asphalt Lake
    On its white pebbles break,
And the vast desert, silent, sand-invested,
These kingdoms all are mine, and thine shall be,
    If thou wilt worship me!

CHRISTUS.
Get thee behind me, Satan! thou shalt worship
The Lord thy God; Him only shalt thou serve!

ANGELS MINISTRANT.
The sun goes down; the evening shadows lengthen,
The fever and the struggle of the day
    Abate and pass away;
Thine Angels Miniatrant, we come to strengthen
And comfort thee, and crown thee with the palm,
    The silence and the calm.



III

THE MARRIAGE IN CANA

THE MUSICIANS.
Rise up, my love, my fair one,
Rise up, and come away,
For lo! the winter is past,
The rain is over and gone,
The flowers appear on the earth,
The time of the singing of birds is come,
And the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.

THE BRIDEGROOM.
Sweetly the minstrels sing the Song of Songs!
My heart runs forward with it, and I say:
Oh set me as a seal upon thine heart,
And set me as a seal upon thine arm;
For love is strong as life, and strong as death,
And cruel as the grave is jealousy!

THE MUSICIANS.
I sleep, but my heart awaketh;
'T is the voice of my beloved
Who knocketh, saying: Open to me,
My sister, my love, my dove,
For my head is filled with dew,
My locks with the drops of the night!

THE BRIDE.
Ah yes, I sleep, and yet my heart awaketh.
It is the voice of my beloved who knocks.

THE BRIDEGROOM.
O beautiful as Rebecca at the fountain,
O beautiful as Ruth among the sheaves!
O fairest among women!  O undefiled!
Thou art all fair, my love, there's no spot in thee!

THE MUSICIANS.
My beloved is white and ruddy,
The chiefest among ten thousand
His locks are black as a raven,
His eyes are the eyes of doves,
Of doves by the rivers of water,
His lips are like unto lilies,
Dropping sweet-smelling myrrh.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
Who is that youth with the dark azure eyes,
And hair, in color like unto the wine,
Parted upon his forehead, and behind
Falling in flowing locks?

PARANYMPHUS.
                       The Nazarene
Who preacheth to the poor in field and village
The coming of God's Kingdom.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
                         How serene
His aspect is! manly yet womanly.

PARANYMPHUS.
Most beautiful among the sons of men!
Oft known to weep, but never known to laugh.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
And tell me, she with eyes of olive tint,
And skin as fair as wheat, and pale brown hair,
The woman at his side?

PARANYMPHUS.
                  His mother, Mary.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
And the tall figure standing close behind them,
Clad all in white, with lace and beard like ashes,
As if he were Elias, the White Witness,
Come from his cave on Carmel to foretell
The end of all things?

PARANYMPHUS.
                    That is Manahem
The Essenian, he who dwells among the palms
Near the Dead Sea.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
            He who foretold to Herod
He should one day be King?

PARANYMPHUS.
                     The same.

ARCHITRICLINUS.
                           Then why
Doth he come here to sadden with his presence
Our marriage feast, belonging to a sect
Haters of women, and that taste not wine?

THE MUSICIANS.
My undefiled is but one,
The only one of her mother,
The choice of her that bare her;
The daughters saw her and blessed her;
The queens and the concubines praised her;
Saying, Lo! who is this
That looketh forth as the morning?

MANAHEM aside.
The Ruler of the Feast is gazing at me,
As if he asked, why is that old man here
Among the revellers?  And thou, the Anointed!
Why art thou here?  I see as in a vision
A figure clothed in purple, crowned with thorns;
I see a cross uplifted in the darkness,
And hear a cry of agony, that shall echo
Forever and forever through the world!

ARCHITRICLINUS.
Give us more wine.  These goblets are all empty.

MARY to CHRISTUS.
They have no wine!

CHRISTUS.
               O woman, what have I
To do with thee?  Mine hour is not yet come.

MARY to the servants.
Whatever he shall say to you, that do.

CHRISTUS.
Fill up these pots with water.

THE MUSICIANS.
Come, my beloved,
Let us go forth into the field,
Let us lodge in the villages;
Let us get up early to the vineyards,
Let us see if the vine flourish,
Whether the tender grape appear,
And the pomegranates bud forth.

CHRISTUS.
                     Draw out now
And bear unto the Ruler of the Feast.

MANAHEM aside.
O thou, brought up among the Essenians,
Nurtured in abstinence, taste not the wine!
It is the poison of dragons from the vineyards
Of Sodom, and the taste of death is in it!

ARCHITRICLINUS to the BRIDEGROOM.
All men set forth good wine at the beginning,
And when men have well drunk, that which is worse;
But thou hast kept the good wine until now.

MANAHEM aside.

The things that have been and shall be no more,
The things that are, and that hereafter shall he,
The things that might have been, and yet were not,
The fading twilight of great joys departed,
The daybreak of great truths as yet unrisen,
The intuition and the expectation
Of something, which, when come, is not the same,
But only like its forecast in men's dreams,
The longing, the delay, and the delight,
Sweeter for the delay; youth, hope, love, death,
And disappointment which is also death,
All these make up the sum of human life;
A dream within a dream, a wind at night
Howling across the desert in despair,
Seeking for something lost it cannot find.
Fate or foreseeing, or whatever name
Men call it, matters not; what is to be
Hath been fore-written in the thought divine
From the beginning.  None can hide from it,
But it will find him out; nor run from it,
But it o'ertaketh him!  The Lord hath said it.

THE BRIDEGROOM to the BRIDE, on the balcony.
When Abraham went with Sarah into Egypt,
The land was all illumined with her beauty;
But thou dost make the very night itself
Brighter than day!  Behold, in glad procession,
Crowding the threshold of the sky above us,
The stars come forth to meet thee with their lamps;
And the soft winds, the ambassadors of flowers,
From neighboring gardens and from fields unseen,
Come laden with odors unto thee, my Queen!

THE MUSICIANS.
Awake, O north-wind,
And come, thou wind of the South.
Blow, blow upon my garden,
That the spices thereof may flow out.


IV

IN THE CORNFIELDS

PHILIP.
Onward through leagues of sun-illumined corn,
As if through parted seas, the pathway runs,
And crowned with sunshine as the Prince of Peace
Walks the beloved Master, leading us,
As Moses led our fathers in old times
Out of the land of bondage!  We have found
Him of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote,
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph.

NATHANAEL.
Can any good come out of Nazareth?
Can this be the Messiah?

PHILIP.
                        Come and see.

NATHANAEL.
The summer sun grows hot: I am anhungered.
How cheerily the Sabbath-breaking quail
Pipes in the corn, and bids us to his Feast
Of Wheat Sheaves!  How the bearded, ripening ears
Toss in the roofless temple of the air;
As if the unseen hand of some High-Priest
Waved them before Mount Tabor as an altar!
It were no harm, if we should pluck and eat.

PHILIP.
How wonderful it is to walk abroad
With the Good Master!  Since the miracle
He wrought at Cana, at the marriage feast,
His fame hath gone abroad through all the land,
And when we come to Nazareth, thou shalt see
How his own people will receive their Prophet,
And hail him as Messiah!  See, he turns
And looks at thee.

CHRISTUS.
                  Behold an Israelite
In whom there is no guile.

NATHANAEL.
          Whence knowest thou me?

CHRISTUS.
Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast
Under the fig-tree, I beheld thee.

NATHANAEL.
                                   Rabbi!
Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King
Of Israel!

CHRISTUS.
           Because I said I saw thee
Under the fig-tree, before Philip called thee,
Believest thou?  Thou shalt see greater things.
Hereafter thou shalt see the heavens unclosed,
The angels of God ascending and descending
Upon the Son of Man!

PHAIRISEES, passing.
                    Hail, Rabbi!

CHRISTUS.
                             Hail!

PHARISEES.
Behold how thy disciples do a thing
Which is not lawful on the Sabbath-day,
And thou forbiddest them not!

CHRISTUS.
                     Have ye not read
What David did when he anhungered was,
And all they that were with him?  How he entered
Into the house of God, and ate the shew-bread,
Which was not lawful, saving for the priests?
Have ye not read, how on the Sabbath-days
The priests profane the Sabbath in the Temple,
And yet are blameless?  But I say to you,
One in this place is greater than the Temple!
And had ye known the meaning of the words,
I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
The guiltless ye would not condemn.  The Sabbath
Was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Passes on with the disciples.

PHARISEES.
This is, alas! some poor demoniac
Wandering about the fields, and uttering
His unintelligible blasphemies
Among the common people, who receive
As prophecies the words they comprehend not!
Deluded folk!  The incomprehensible
Alone excites their wonder.  There is none
So visionary, or so void of sense,
But he will find a crowd to follow him!


V

NAZARETH

CHRISTUS, reading in the Synagogue.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me.
He hath anointed me to preach good tidings
Unto the poor; to heal the broken-hearted;
To comfort those that mourn, and to throw open
The prison doors of captives, and proclaim
The Year Acceptable of the Lord, our God!

He closes the book and sits down.

A PHARISEE.
Who is this youth?  He hath taken the Teacher's seat!
Will he instruct the Elders?

A PRIEST.
                            Fifty years
Have I been Priest here in the Synagogue,
And never have I seen so young a man
Sit in the Teacher's seat!

CHRISTUS.
                         Behold, to-day
This scripture is fulfilled.  One is appointed
And hath been sent to them that mourn in Zion,
To give them beauty for ashes, and the oil
Of joy for mourning!  They shall build again
The old waste-places; and again raise up
The former desolations, and repair
The cities that are wasted!  As a bridegroom
Decketh himself with ornaments; as a bride
Adorneth herself with jewels, so the Lord
Hath clothed me with the robe of righteousness!

A PRIEST.
He speaks the Prophet's words; but with an air
As if himself had been foreshadowed in them!

CHRISTUS.
For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace,
And for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest
Until its righteousness be as a brightness,
And its salvation as a lamp that burneth!
Thou shalt be called no longer the Forsaken,
Nor any more thy land the Desolate.
The Lord hath sworn, by his right hand hath sworn,
And by his arm of strength: I will no more
Give to thine enemies thy corn as meat;
The sons of strangers shall not drink thy wine.
Go through, go through the gates!  Prepare a way
Unto the people!  Gather out the stones!
Lift up a standard for the people!

A PRIEST.
                                   Ah!
These are seditious words!

CHRISTUS.
             And they shall call them
The holy people; the redeemed of God!
And thou, Jerusalem, shalt be called Sought out,
A city not forsaken!

A PHARISEE.
                     Is not this
The carpenter Joseph's son?  Is not his mother
Called Mary? and his brethren and his sisters
Are they not with us?  Doth he make himself
To be a Prophet?

CHRISTUS.
                 No man is a Prophet
In his own country, and among his kin.
In his own house no Prophet is accepted.
I say to you, in the land of Israel
Were many widows in Elijah's day,
When for three years and more the heavens were shut,
And a great famine was throughout the land;
But unto no one was Elijah sent
Save to Sarepta, to a city of Sidon,
And to a woman there that was a widow.
And many lepers were then in the land
Of Israel, in the time of Eliseus
The Prophet, and yet none of them was cleansed,
Save Naaman the Syrian!

A PRIEST.
                      Say no more!
Thou comest here into our Synagogue
And speakest to the Elders and the Priests,
As if the very mantle of Elijah
Had fallen upon thee!  Are thou not ashamed?

A PHARISEE.
We want no Prophets here!  Let him be driven
From Synagogue and city!  Let him go
And prophesy to the Samaritans!

AN ELDER.
The world is changed.  We Elders are as nothing!
We are but yesterdays, that have no part
Or portion in to-day!  Dry leaves that rustle,
That make a little sound, and then are dust!

A PHARISEE.
A carpenter's apprentice! a mechanic,
Whom we have seen at work here in the town
Day after day; a stripling without learning,
Shall he pretend to unfold the Word of God
To men grown old in study of the Law?

CHRISTUS is thrust out.


VI

THE SEA OF GALILEE.

PETER and ANDREW mending their nets.

PETER.
Never was such a marvellous draught of fishes
Heard of in Galilee!  The market-places
Both of Bethsaida and Capernaum
Are full of them!  Yet we had toiled all night
And taken nothing, when the Master said:
Launch out into the deep, and cast your nets;
And doing this, we caught such multitudes,
Our nets like spiders' webs were snapped asunder,
And with the draught we filled two ships so full
That they began to sink.  Then I knelt down
Amazed, and said: O Lord, depart from me,
I am a sinful man.  And he made answer:
Simon, fear not; henceforth thou shalt catch men!
What was the meaning of those words?

ANDREW.
                          I know not.
But here is Philip, come from Nazareth.
He hath been with the Master.  Tell us, Philip,
What tidings dost thou bring?

PHILIP.
                     Most wonderful!
As we drew near to Nain, out of the gate
Upon a bier was carried the dead body
Of a young man, his mother's only son,
And she a widow, who with lamentation
Bewailed her loss, and the much people with her;
And when the Master saw her he was filled
With pity; and he said to her: Weep not
And came and touched the bier, and they that bare it
Stood still; and then he said: Young man, arise!
And he that had been dead sat up, and soon
Began to speak; and he delivered him
Unto his mother.  And there came a fear
On all the people, and they glorified
The Lord, and said, rejoicing: A great Prophet
Is risen up among us! and the Lord
Hath visited his people!

PETER.
                       A great Prophet?
Ay, greater than a Prophet: greater even
Than John the Baptist!

PHILIP.
                   Yet the Nazarenes
Rejected him.

PETER.
              The Nazarenes are dogs!
As natural brute beasts, they growl at things
They do not understand; and they shall perish,
Utterly perish in their own corruption.
The Nazarenes are dogs!

PHILIP.
                They drave him forth
Out of their Synagogue, out of their city,
And would have cast him down a precipice,
But, passing through the midst of them, he vanished
Out of their hands.

PETER.
          Wells are they without water,
Clouds carried with a tempest, unto whom
The mist of darkness is reserved forever.

PHILIP.
Behold, he cometh.  There is one man with him
I am amazed to see!

ANDREW.
                  What man is that?

PHILIP.
Judas Iscariot; he that cometh last,
Girt with a leathern apron.  No one knoweth
His history; but the rumor of him is
He had an unclean spirit in his youth.
It hath not left him yet.

CHRISTUS, passing.
                        Come unto me,
All ye that labor and are heavy laden,
And I will give you rest!  Come unto me,
And take my yoke upon you and learn of me,
For I am meek, and I am lowly in heart,
And ye shall all find rest unto your souls!

PHILIP.
Oh, there is something in that voice that reaches
The innermost recesses of my spirit!
I feel that it might say unto the blind:
Receive your sight! and straightway they would see!
I feel that it might say unto the dead,
Arise! and they would hear it and obey!
Behold, he beckons to us!

CHRISTUS to PETER and ANDREW.
                          Follow me!

PETER.
Master, I will leave all and follow thee.


VII

THE DEMONIAC OF GADARA

A GADARENE.
He hath escaped, hath plucked his chains asunder,
And broken his fetters; always night and day
Is in the mountains here, and in the tombs,
Crying aloud, and cutting himself with stones,
Exceeding fierce, so that no man can tame him!

THE DEMONIAC from above, unseen.
O Aschmedai! O Aschmedai, have pity!

A GADARENE.
Listen!  It is his voice!  Go warn the people
Just landing from the lake!

THE DEMONIAC.
                          O Aschmedai!
Thou angel of the bottomless pit, have pity!
It was enough to hurl King Solomon,
On whom be peace! two hundred leagues away
Into the country, and to make him scullion
In the kitchen of the King of Maschkemen!
Why dost thou hurl me here among these rocks,
And cut me with these stones?

A GADARENE.
                He raves and mutters
He knows not what.

THE DEMONIAC, appearing from a tomb among the rocks.
               The wild cock Tarnegal
Singeth to me, and bids me to the banquet,
Where all the Jews shall come; for they have slain
Behemoth the great ox, who daily cropped
A thousand hills for food, and at a draught
Drank up the river Jordan, and have slain
The huge Leviathan, and stretched his skin
Upon the high walls of Jerusalem,
And made them shine from one end of the world
Unto the other; and the fowl Barjuchne,
Whose outspread wings eclipse the sun, and make
Midnight at noon o'er all the continents!
And we shall drink the wine of Paradise
From Adam's cellars.

A GADARENE.
             O thou unclean spirit!

THE DEMONIAC, hurling down a stone.
This is the wonderful Barjuchne's egg,
That fell out of her nest, and broke to pieces
And swept away three hundred cedar-trees,
And threescore villages!--Rabbi Eliezer,
How thou didst sin there in that seaport town
When thou hadst carried safe thy chest of silver
Over the seven rivers for her sake!
I too have sinned beyond the reach of pardon.
Ye hills and mountains, pray for mercy on me!
Ye stars and planets, pray for mercy on me!
Ye sun and moon, oh pray for mercy on me!

CHRISTUS and his disciples pass.

A GADARENE.
There is a man here of Decapolis,
Who hath an unclean spirit; so that none
Can pass this way.  He lives among the tombs
Up there upon the cliffs, and hurls down stones
On those who pass beneath.

CHRISTUS.
                     Come out of him,
Thou unclean spirit!

THE DEMONIAC.
                    What have I to do
With thee, thou Son of God?  Do not torment us.

CHRISTUS.
What is thy name?

THE DEMONIAC.
             Legion; for we are many.
Cain, the first murderer; and the King Belshazzar,
And Evil Merodach of Babylon,
And Admatha, the death-cloud, prince of Persia
And Aschmedai the angel of the pit,
And many other devils.  We are Legion.
Send us not forth beyond Decapolis;
Command us not to go into the deep!
There is a herd of swine here in the pastures,
Let us go into them.

CHRISTUS.
                     Come out of him,
Thou unclean spirit!

A GADARENE.
                     See how stupefied,
How motionless he stands!  He cries no more;
He seems bewildered and in silence stares
As one who, walking in his sleep, awakes
And knows not where he is, and looks about him,
And at his nakedness, and is ashamed.

THE DEMONIAC.
Why am I here alone among the tombs?
What have they done to me, that I am naked?
Ah, woe is me!

CHRISTUS.
            Go home unto thy friends
And tell them how great things the Lord hath done
For thee, and how He had compassion on thee!

A SWINEHERD, running.
The herds! the herd!  O most unlucky day!
They were all feeding quiet in the sun,
When suddenly they started, and grew savage
As the wild boars of Tabor, and together
Rushed down a precipice into the sea!
They are all drowned!

PETER.
        Thus righteously are punished
The apostate Jews, that eat the flesh of swine,
And broth of such abominable things!

GREEKS OF GADARA.
We sacrifice a sow unto Demeter
At the beginning of harvest and another
To Dionysus at the vintage-time.
Therefore we prize our herds of swine, and count them
Not as unclean, but as things consecrate
To the immortal gods.  O great magician,
Depart out of our coasts; let us alone,
We are afraid of thee.

PETER.
                      Let us depart;
For they that sanctify and purify
Themselves in gardens, eating flesh of swine.
And the abomination, and the mouse,
Shall be consumed together, saith the Lord!


VIII

TALITHA CUMI

JAIRUS at the feet of CHRISTUS.
O Master!  I entreat thee!  I implore thee!
My daughter lieth at the point of death;
I pray thee come and lay thy hands upon her,
And she shall live!

CHRISTUS.
    Who was it touched my garments?

SIMON PETER.
Thou seest the multitude that throng and press thee,
And sayest thou: Who touched me?  'T was not I.

CHRISTUS.
Some one hath touched my garments; I perceive
That virtue is gone out of me.

A WOMAN.
                             O Master!
Forgive me!  For I said within myself,
If I so much as touch his garment's hem,
I shall be whole.

CHRISTUS.
         Be of good comfort, daughter!
Thy faith hath made thee whole.  Depart in peace.

A MESSENGER from the house.
Why troublest thou the Master?  Hearest thou not
The flute players, and the voices of the women
Singing their lamentation?  She is dead!

THE MINSTRELS AND MOURNERS.
We have girded ourselves with sackcloth!
We have covered our heads with ashes!
For our young men die, and our maidens
Swoon in the streets of the city;
And into their mother's bosom
They pour out their souls like water!

CHRISTUS, going in.
Give place.  Why make ye this ado, and weep?
She is not dead, but sleepeth.

THE MOTHER, from within.
                          Cruel Death!
To take away front me this tender blossom!
To take away my dove, my lamb, my darling!

THE MINSTRELS AND MOURNERS.
He hath led me and brought into darkness,
Like the dead of old in dark places!
He hath bent his bow, and hath set me
Apart as a mark for his arrow!
He hath covered himself with a cloud,
That our prayer should not pass through and reach him!

THE CROWD.
He stands beside her bed!  He takes her hand!
Listen, he speaks to her!

CHRISTUS, within.
                         Maiden, arise!

THE CROWD.
See, she obeys his voice!  She stirs!  She lives!
Her mother holds her folded in her arms!
O miracle of miracles!  O marvel!


IX

THE TOWER OF MAGDALA

MARY MAGDALENE.
Companionless, unsatisfied, forlorn,
I sit here in this lonely tower, and look
Upon the lake below me, and the hills
That swoon with heat, and see as in a vision
All my past life unroll itself before me.
The princes and the merchants come to me,
Merchants of Tyre and Princes of Damascus.
And pass, and disappear, and are no more;
But leave behind their merchandise and jewels,
Their perfumes, and their gold, and their disgust.
I loathe them, and the very memory of them
Is unto me as thought of food to one
Cloyed with the luscious figs of Dalmanutha!
What if hereafter, in the long hereafter
Of endless joy or pain, or joy in pain,
It were my punishment to be with them
Grown hideous and decrepit in their sins,
And hear them say: Thou that hast brought us here,
Be unto us as thou hast been of old!
I look upon this raiment that I wear,
These silks, and these embroideries, and they seem
Only as cerements wrapped about my limbs!
I look upon these rings thick set with pearls,
And emerald and amethyst and jasper,
And they are burning coals upon my flesh!
This serpent on my wrist becomes alive!
Away, thou viper! and away, ye garlands,
Whose odors bring the swift remembrance back
Of the unhallowed revels in these chambers!
But yesterday,--and yet it seems to me
Something remote, like a pathetic song
Sung long ago by minstrels in the street,--
But yesterday, as from this tower I gazed,
Over the olive and the walnut trees
Upon the lake and the white ships, and wondered
Whither and whence they steered, and who was in them,
A fisher's boat drew near the landing-place
Under the oleanders, and the people
Came up from it, and passed beneath the tower,
Close under me.  In front of them, as leader,
Walked one of royal aspect, clothed in white,
Who lifted up his eyes, and looked at me,
And all at once the air seemed filled and living
With a mysterious power, that streamed from him,
And overflowed me with an atmosphere
Of light and love.  As one entranced I stood,
And when I woke again, lo! he was gone;
So that I said: Perhaps it is a dream.
But from that very hour the seven demons
That had their habitation in this body
Which men call beautiful, departed from me!

This morning, when the first gleam of the dawn
Made Lebanon a glory in the air,
And all below was darkness, I beheld
An angel, or a spirit glorified,
With wind-tossed garments walking on the lake.
The face I could not see, but I distinguished
The attitude and gesture, and I knew
'T was he that healed me.  And the gusty wind
Brought to mine ears a voice, which seemed to say:
Be of good cheer!  'T is I!  Be not afraid!
And from the darkness, scarcely heard, the answer:
If it be thou, bid me come unto thee
Upon the water!  And the voice said: Come!
And then I heard a cry of fear: Lord, save me!
As of a drowning man.  And then the voice:
Why didst thou doubt, O thou of little faith!
At this all vanished, and the wind was hushed,
And the great sun came up above the hills,
And the swift-flying vapors hid themselves
In caverns among the rocks!  Oh, I must find him
And follow him, and be with him forever!

Thou box of alabaster, in whose walls
The souls of flowers lie pent, the precious balm
And spikenard of Arabian farms, the spirits
Of aromatic herbs, ethereal natures
Nursed by the sun and dew, not all unworthy
To bathe his consecrated feet, whose step
Makes every threshold holy that he crosses;
Let us go forth upon our pilgrimage,
Thou and I only!  Let us search for him
Until we find him, and pour out our souls
Before his feet, till all that's left of us
Shall be the broken caskets that once held us!


X

THE HOUSE OF SIMON THE PHARISEE

A GUEST at table.
Are ye deceived?  Have any of the Rulers
Believed on him? or do they know indeed
This man to be the very Christ?  Howbeit
We know whence this man is, but when the Christ
Shall come, none knoweth whence he is.

CHRISTUS.
Whereunto shall I liken, then, the men
Of this generation? and what are they like?
They are like children sitting in the markets,
And calling unto one another, saying:
We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced
We have mourned unto you, and ye have not wept!
This say I unto you, for John the Baptist
Came neither eating bread nor drinking wine
Ye say he hath a devil.  The Son of Man
Eating and drinking cometh, and ye say:
Behold a gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber;
Behold a friend of publicans and sinners!

A GUEST aside to SIMON.
Who is that woman yonder, gliding in
So silently behind him?

SIMON.
                       It is Mary,
Who dwelleth in the Tower of Magdala.

THE GUEST.
See, how she kneels there weeping, and her tears
Fall on his feet; and her long, golden hair
Waves to and fro and wipes them dry again.
And now she kisses them, and from a box
Of alabaster is anointing them
With precious ointment, filling all the house
With its sweet odor!

SIMON, aside,
                 Oh, this man, forsooth,
Were he indeed a Prophet, would have known
Who and what manner of woman this may be
That toucheth him! would know she is a sinner!

CHRISTUS.
Simon, somewhat have I to say to thee.

SIMON.
Master, say on.

CHRISTUS.
               A certain creditor
Had once two debtors; and the one of them
Owed him five hundred pence; the other, fifty.
They having naught to pay withal, he frankly
Forgave them both.  Now tell me which of them
Will love him most?

SIMON.
               He, I suppose to whom
He most forgave.

CHRISTUS.
        Yea, thou hast rightly judged.
Seest thou this woman?  When thine house I entered,
Thou gavest me no water for my feet,
But she hath washed them with her tears, and wiped them
With her own hair.  Thou gavest me no kiss;
This woman hath not ceased, since I came in,
To kiss my feet.  My head with oil didst thou
Anoint not; but this woman hath anointed
My feet with ointment.  Hence I say to thee,
Her sins, which have been many, are forgiven,
For she loved much.

THE GUESTS.
             Oh, who, then, is this man
That pardoneth also sins without atonement?

CHRISTUS.
Woman, thy faith hath saved thee!  Go in peace!



THE SECOND PASSOVER.

I

BEFORE THE GATES OF MACHAERUS

MANAHEM.
Welcome, O wilderness, and welcome, night
And solitude, and ye swift-flying stars
That drift with golden sands the barren heavens,
Welcome once more!  The Angels of the Wind
Hasten across the desert to receive me;
And sweeter than men's voices are to me
The voices of these solitudes; the sound
Of unseen rivulets, and the far-off cry
Of bitterns in the reeds of water-pools.
And lo! above me, like the Prophet's arrow
Shot from the eastern window, high in air
The clamorous cranes go singing through the night.
O ye mysterious pilgrims of the air,
Would I had wings that I might follow you!

I look forth from these mountains, and behold
The omnipotent and omnipresent night,
Mysterious as the future and the fate
That hangs o'er all men's lives!  I see beneath me
The desert stretching to the Dead Sea shore,
And westward, faint and far away, the glimmer
Of torches on Mount Olivet, announcing
The rising of the Moon of Passover.
Like a great cross it seems, on which suspended,
With head bowed down in agony, I see
A human figure!  Hide, O merciful heaven,
The awful apparition from my sight!

And thou, Machaerus, lifting high and black
Thy dreadful walls against the rising moon,
Haunted by demons and by apparitions,
Lilith, and Jezerhara, and Bedargon,
How grim thou showest in the uncertain light,
A palace and a prison, where King Herod
Feasts with Herodias, while the Baptist John
Fasts, and consumes his unavailing life!
And in thy court-yard grows the untithed rue,
Huge as the olives of Gethsemane,
And ancient as the terebinth of Hebron,
Coeval with the world.  Would that its leaves
Medicinal could purge thee of the demons
That now possess thee, and the cunning fox
That burrows in thy walls, contriving mischief!

Music is heard from within.

Angels of God!  Sandalphon, thou that weavest
The prayers of men into immortal garlands,
And thou, Metatron, who dost gather up
Their songs, and bear them to the gates of heaven,
Now gather up together in your hands
The prayers that fill this prison, and the songs
That echo from the ceiling of this palace,
And lay them side by side before God's feet!

He enters the castle.


II

HEROD'S BANQUET-HALL

MANAHEM.
Thou hast sent for me, O King, and I am here.

HEROD.
Who art thou?

MANAHEM.
             Manahem, the Essenian.

HEROD.
I recognize thy features, but what mean
These torn and faded garments?  On thy road
Have demons crowded thee, and rubbed against thee,
And given thee weary knees?  A cup of wine!

MANAHEM.
The Essenians drink no wine.

HEROD.
                What wilt thou, then?

MANAHEM.
Nothing.

HEROD.
       Not even a cup of water?

MANAHEM.
                          Nothing.
Why hast thou sent for me?

HEROD.
                 Dost thou remember
One day when I, a schoolboy in the streets
Of the great city, met thee on my way
To school, and thou didst say to me: Hereafter
Thou shalt be king?

MANAHEM.
                  Yea, I remember it.

HEROD.
Thinking thou didst not know me, I replied:
I am of humble birth; whereat thou, smiling,
Didst smite me with thy hand, and saidst again:
Thou shalt be king; and let the friendly blows
That Manahem hath given thee on this day
Remind thee of the fickleness of fortune.

MANAHEM.
What more?

HEROD.
          No more.

MANAHEM.
             Yea, for I said to thee:
It shall be well with thee if thou love justice
And clemency towards thy fellow-men.
Hast thou done this, O King?

HEROD.
                    Go, ask my people.

MANAHEM.
And then, foreseeing all thy life, I added:
But these thou wilt forget; and at the end
Of life the Lord will punish thee.

HEROD.
                              The end!
When will that come?  For this I sent to thee.
How long shall I still reign?  Thou dost not answer!
Speak! shall I reign ten years?

MANAHEM.
              Thou shalt reign twenty,
Nay, thirty years.  I cannot name the end.

HEROD.
Thirty?  I thank thee, good Essenian!
This is my birthday, and a happier one
Was never mine.  We hold a banquet here.
See, yonder are Herodias and her daughter.

MANAHEM, aside.
'T is said that devils sometimes take the shape
Of ministering angels, clothed with air.
That they may be inhabitants of earth,
And lead man to destruction.  Such are these.

HEROD.
Knowest thou John the Baptist?

MANAHEM.
                   Yea, I know him;
Who knows him not?

HEROD.
     Know, then, this John the Baptist
Said that it was not lawful I should marry
My brother Philip's wife, and John the Baptist
Is here in prison.  In my father's time
Matthias Margaloth was put to death
For tearing the golden eagle from its station
Above the Temple Gate,--a slighter crime
Than John is guilty of.  These things are warnings
To intermeddlers not to play with eagles,
Living or dead.  I think the Essenians
Are wiser, or more wary, are they not?

MANAHEM.
The Essenians do not marry.

HEROD.
                      Thou hast given
My words a meaning foreign to my thought.

MANAHEM.
Let me go hence, O King!

HEROD.
                     Stay yet awhile,
And see the daughter of Herodias dance.
Cleopatra of Jerusalem, my mother,
In her best days, was not more beautiful.

Music. THE DAUGHTER OP HERODIAS dances.

HEROD.
Oh, what was Miriam dancing with her timbrel,
Compared to this one?

MANAHEM, aside.
              O thou Angel of Death,
Dancing at funerals among the women,
When men bear out the dead! The air is hot
And stifles me!  Oh for a breath of air!
Bid me depart, O King!

HEROD.
              Not yet.  Come hither,
Salome, thou enchantress!  Ask of me
Whate'er thou wilt; and even unto the half
Of all my kingdom, I will give it thee,
As the Lord liveth!

DAUGHTER OF HERODIAS, kneeling.
                  Give me here the head
Of John the Baptist on this silver charger!

HEROD.
Not that, dear child!  I dare not; for the people
Regard John as a prophet.

DAUGHTER OF HERODIAS.
                  Thou hast sworn it.

HEROD.
For mine oath's sake, then.  Send unto the prison;
Let him die quickly.  Oh, accursed oath!

MANAHEM.
Bid me depart, O King!

HEROD.
                      Good Manahem,
Give me thy hand.  I love the Essenians.
He's gone and hears me not!  The guests are dumb,
Awaiting the pale face, the silent witness.
The lamps flare; and the curtains of the doorways
Wave to and fro as if a ghost were passing!
Strengthen my heart, red wine of Ascalon!


III

UNDER THE WALLS OF MACHAERUS

MANAHEM, rushing out.
Away from this Palace of sin!
The demons, the terrible powers
Of the air, that haunt its towers
And hide in its water-spouts,
Deafen me with the din
Of their laughter and their shouts
For the crimes that are done within!
Sink back into the earth,
Or vanish into the air,
Thou castle of despair!
Let it all be but a dream
Of the things of monstrous birth,
Of the things that only seem!
White Angel of the Moon,
Onafiel! be my guide
Out of this hateful place
Of sin and death, nor hide
In you black cloud too soon
Thy pale and tranquil face!

A trumpet is blown from the walls.

Hark! hark!  It is the breath
Of the trump of doom and death,
From the battlements overhead
Like a burden of sorrow cast
On the midnight and the blast,
A wailing for the dead,
That the gusts drop and uplift!
O Herod, thy vengeance is swift!
O Herodias, thou hast been
The demon, the evil thing,
That in place of Esther the Queen,
In place of the lawful bride,
Hast lain at night by the side
Of Ahasuerus the king!

The trumpet again.

The Prophet of God is dead!
At a drunken monarch's call,
At a dancing-woman's beck,
They have severed that stubborn neck
And into the banquet-hall
Are bearing the ghastly head!

A body is thrown from the tower.

A torch of red
Lights the window with its glow;
And a white mass as of snow
Is hurled into the abyss
Of the black precipice,
That yawns for it below!
O hand of the Most High,
O hand of Adonai!
Bury it, hide it away
From the birds and beasts of prey,
And the eyes of the homicide,
More pitiless than they,
As thou didst bury of yore
The body of him that died
On the mountain of Peor!
Even now I behold a sign,
A threatening of wrath divine,
A watery, wandering star,
Through whose streaming hair, and the white
Unfolding garments of light,
That trail behind it afar,
The constellations shine!
And the whiteness and brightness appear
Like the Angel bearing the Seer
By the hair of his head, in the might
And rush of his vehement flight.
And I listen until I hear
From fathomless depths of the sky
The voice of his prophecy
Sounding louder and more near!

Malediction! malediction!
May the lightnings of heaven fall
On palace and prison wall,
And their desolation be
As the day of fear and affliction,
As the day of anguish and ire,
With the burning and fuel of fire,
In the Valley of the Sea!


IV

NICODEMUS AT NIGHT

NICODEMUS.
The streets are silent.  The dark houses seem
Like sepulchres, in which the sleepers lie
Wrapped in their shrouds, and for the moment dead.
The lamps are all extinguished; only one
Burns steadily, and from the door its light
Lies like a shining gate across the street.
He waits for me.  Ah, should this be at last
The long-expected Christ!  I see him there
Sitting alone, deep-buried in his thought,
As if the weight of all the world were resting
Upon him, and thus bowed him down.  O Rabbi,
We know thou art a Teacher come from God,
For no man can perform the miracles
Thou dost perform, except the Lord be with him.
Thou art a Prophet, sent here to proclaim
The Kingdom of the Lord.  Behold in me
A Ruler of the Jews, who long have waited
The coming of that kingdom.  Tell me of it.

CHRISTUS.
Verily, verily I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again, he cannot
Behold the Kingdom of God!

NICODEMUS.
                      Be born again?
How can a man be born when he is old?
Say, can he enter for a second time
Into his mother's womb, and so be born?

CHRISTUS.
Verily I say unto thee, except
A man be born of water and the spirit,
He cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
For that which of the flesh is born, is flesh;
And that which of the spirit is born, is spirit.

NICODEMUS.
We Israelites from the Primeval Man
Adam Ahelion derive our bodies;
Our souls are breathings of the Holy Ghost.
No more than this we know, or need to know.

CHRISTUS.
Then marvel not, that I said unto thee
Ye must be born again.

NICODEMUS.
                       The mystery
Of birth and death we cannot comprehend.

CHRISTUS.
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and we hear
The sound thereof, but know not whence it cometh,
Nor whither it goeth.  So is every one
Born of the spirit!

NICODEMUS, aside.
              How can these things be?
He seems to speak of some vague realm of shadows,
Some unsubstantial kingdom of the air!
It is not this the Jews are waiting for,
Nor can this be the Christ, the Son of David,
Who shall deliver us!

CHRISTUS.
                     Art thou a master
Of Israel, and knowest not these things?
We speak that we do know, and testify
That we have seen, and ye will not receive
Our witness.  If I tell you earthly things,
And ye believe not, how shall ye believe,
If I should tell you of things heavenly?
And no man hath ascended up to heaven,
But he alone that first came down from heaven,
Even the Son of Man which is in heaven!

NICODEMUS, aside.
This is a dreamer of dreams; a visionary,
Whose brain is overtasked, until he deems
The unseen world to be a thing substantial,
And this we live in, an unreal vision!
And yet his presence fascinates and fills me
With wonder, and I feel myself exalted
Into a higher region, and become
Myself in part a dreamer of his dreams,
A seer of his visions!

CHRISTUS.
                      And as Moses
Uplifted the serpent in the wilderness,
So must the Son of Man be lifted up;
That whosoever shall believe in Him
Shall perish not, but have eternal life.
He that believes in Him is not condemned;
He that believes not, is condemned already.

NICODEMUS, aside.
He speaketh like a Prophet of the Lord!

CHRISTUS.
This is the condemnation; that the light
Is come into the world, and men loved darkness
Rather than light, because their deeds are evil!

NICODEMUS, aside.
Of me he speaketh!  He reproveth me,
Because I come by night to question him!

CHRISTUS.
For every one that doeth evil deeds
Hateth the light, nor cometh to the light
Lest he should be reproved.

NICODEMUS, aside.
                      Alas, how truly
He readeth what is passing in my heart!

CHRISTUS.
But he that doeth truth comes to the light,
So that his deeds may be made manifest,
That they are wrought in God.

NICODEMUS.
                          Alas! alas!


V

BLIND BARTIMEUS

BARTIMEUS.
Be not impatient, Chilion; it is pleasant
To sit here in the shadow of the walls
Under the palms, and hear the hum of bees,
And rumor of voices passing to and fro,
And drowsy bells of caravans on their way
To Sidon or Damascus.  This is still
The City of Palms, and yet the walls thou seest
Are not the old walls, not the walls where Rahab
Hid the two spies, and let them down by cords
Out of the window, when the gates were shut,
And it was dark.  Those walls were overthrown
When Joshua's army shouted, and the priests
Blew with their seven trumpets.

CHILION.
                      When was that?

BARTIMEUS.
O my sweet rose of Jericho, I know not
Hundreds of years ago.  And over there
Beyond the river, the great prophet Elijah
Was taken by a whirlwind up to heaven
In chariot of fire, with fiery horses.
That is the plain of Moab; and beyond it
Rise the blue summits of Mount Abarim,
Nebo and Pisgah and Peor, where Moses
Died, whom the Lord knew face to face? and whom
He buried in a valley, and no man
Knows of his sepulchre unto this day.

CHILION.
Would thou couldst see these places, as I see them.

BARTIMEUS.
I have not seen a glimmer of the light
Since thou wast born.  I never saw thy face,
And yet I seem to see it; and one day
Perhaps shall see it; for there is a Prophet
In Galilee, the Messiah, the Son of David,
Who heals the blind, if I could only find him.
I hear the sound of many feet approaching,
And voices, like the murmur of a crowd!
What seest thou?

CHILION.
           A young man clad in white
Is coming through the gateway, and a crowd
Of people follow.

BARTIMEUS.
                 Can it be the Prophet!
O neighbors, tell me who it is that passes?

ONE OF THE CROWD.
Jesus of Nazareth.

BARTIMEUS, crying.
                    O Son of David!
Have mercy on me!

MANY OP THE CROWD.
            Peace.  Blind Bartimeus!
Do not disturb the Master.

BARTIMEUS, crying more vehemently.
                        Son of David,
Have mercy on me!

ONE OF THE CROWD.
              See, the Master stops.
Be of good comfort; rise, He calleth thee!

BARTIMEUS, casting away his cloak.
Chilion! good neighbors! lead me on.

CHRISTUS.
                       What wilt thou
That I should do to thee?

BARTIMEUS.
              Good Lord! my sight--
That I receive my sight!

CHRISTUS.
                   Receive thy sight!
Thy faith hath made thee whole!

THE CROWD.
                      He sees again!

CHRISTUS passes on, The crowd gathers round BARTIMEUS.

BARTIMEUS.
I see again; but sight bewilders me!
Like a remembered dream, familiar things
Come back to me.  I see the tender sky
Above me, see the trees, the city walls,
And the old gateway, through whose echoing arch
I groped so many years; and you, my neighbors;
But know you by your friendly voices only.
How beautiful the world is! and how wide!
Oh, I am miles away, if I but look!
Where art thou, Chilion?

CHILION.
                     Father, I am here.

BARTIMEUS.
Oh let me gaze upon thy face, dear child!
For I have only seen thee with my hands!
How beautiful thou art!  I should have known thee;
Thou hast her eyes whom we shall see hereafter!
O God of Abraham!  Elion!  Adonai!
Who art thyself a Father, pardon me
If for a moment I have thee postponed
To the affections and the thoughts of earth,
Thee, and the adoration that I owe thee,
When by thy power alone these darkened eyes
Have been unsealed again to see thy light!


VI

JACOB'S WELL

A SAMARITAN WOMAN.
The sun is hot; and the dry east-wind blowing
Fills all the air with dust.  The birds are silent;
Even the little fieldfares in the corn
No longer twitter; only the grasshoppers
Sing their incessant song of sun and summer.
I wonder who those strangers were I met
Going into the city?  Galileans
They seemed to me in speaking, when they asked
The short way to the market-place.  Perhaps
They are fishermen from the lake; or travellers,
Looking to find the inn.  And here is some one
Sitting beside the well; another stranger;
A Galilean also by his looks.
What can so many Jews be doing here
Together in Samaria?  Are they going
Up to Jerusalem to the Passover?
Our Passover is better here at Sychem,
For here is Ebal; here is Gerizim,
The mountain where our father Abraham
Went up to offer Isaac; here the tomb
Of Joseph,--for they brought his bones Egypt
And buried them in this land, and it is holy.

CHRISTUS.
Give me to drink.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
             How can it be that thou,
Being a Jew, askest to drink of me
Which am a woman of Samaria?
You Jews despise us; have no dealings with us;
Make us a byword; call us in derision
The silly folk of Sychar.  Sir, how is it
Thou askest drink of me?

CHRISTUS.
                  If thou hadst known
The gift of God, and who it is that sayeth
Give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of Him;
He would have given thee the living water.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
Sir, thou hast naught to draw with, and the well
Is deep!  Whence hast thou living water?
Say, art thou greater than our father Jacob,
Which gave this well to us, and drank thereof
Himself, and all his children and his cattle?

CHRISTUS.
Ah, whosoever drinketh of this water
Shall thirst again; but whosoever drinketh
The water I shall give him shall not thirst
Forevermore, for it shall be within him
A well of living water, springing up
Into life everlasting.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
                       Every day
I must go to and fro, in heat and cold,
And I am weary.  Give me of this water,
That I may thirst not, nor come here to draw.

CHRISTUS.
Go call thy husband, woman, and come hither.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
I have no husband, Sir.

CHRISTUS.
                   Thou hast well said
I have no husband.  Thou hast had five husbands;
And he whom now thou hast is not thy husband.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
Surely thou art a Prophet, for thou readest
The hidden things of life!  Our fathers worshipped
Upon this mountain Gerizim; and ye say
The only place in which men ought to worship
Is at Jerusalem.

CHRISTUS.
                  Believe me, woman,
The hour is coming, when ye neither shall
Upon this mount, nor at Jerusalem,
Worship the Father; for the hour is coming,
And is now come, when the true worshippers
Shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth!
The Father seeketh such to worship Him.
God is a spirit; and they that worship Him
Must worship Him in spirit and in truth.

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
Master, I know that the Messiah cometh,
Which is called Christ; and he will tell us all things.

CHRISTUS.
I that speak unto thee am He!

THE DISCIPLES, returning.
                              Behold,
The Master sitting by the well, and talking
With a Samaritan woman!  With a woman
Of Sychar, the silly people, always boasting
Of their Mount Ebal, and Mount Gerizim,
Their Everlasting Mountain, which they think
Higher and holier than our Mount Moriah!
Why, once upon the Feast of the New Moon,
When our great Sanhedrim of Jerusalem
Had all its watch-fires kindled on the hills
To warn the distant villages, these people
Lighted up others to mislead the Jews,
And make a mockery of their festival!
See, she has left the Master; and is running
Back to the city!

SAMARITAN WOMAN.
                  Oh, come see a man
Who hath told me all things that I ever did!
Say, is not this the Christ?

THE DISCIPLES.
                        Lo, Master, here
Is food, that we have brought thee from the city.
We pray thee eat it.

CHRISTUS.
                    I have food to eat
Ye know not of.

THE DISCIPLES, to each other.
              Hath any man been here,
And brought Him aught to eat, while we were gone?

CHRISTUS.
The food I speak of is to do the will
Of Him that sent me, and to finish his work.
Do ye not say, Lo! there are yet four months
And cometh, harvest?  I say unto you,
Lift up your eyes, and look upon the fields,
For they are white already unto harvest!


VII

THE COASTS OF CAESAREA PHILIPPI

CHRISTUS, going up the mountain.
Who do the people say I am?

JOHN.
                           Some say
That thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias;
And others Jeremiah.

JAMES.
                    Or that one
Of the old Prophets is risen again.

CHRISTUS.
But who say ye I am?

PETER.
                 Thou art the Christ?
Thou art the Son of God!

CHRISTUS.
                     Blessed art thou,
Simon Barjona!  Flesh and blood hath not
Revealed it unto thee, but even my Father,
Which is in Heaven.  And I say unto thee
That thou art Peter; and upon this rock
I build my Church, and all the gates of Hell
Shall not prevail against it.  But take heed
Ye tell no man that I am the Christ.
For I must go up to Jerusalem,
And suffer many things, and be rejected
Of the Chief Priests, and of the Scribes and Elders,
And must be crucified, and the third day
Shall rise again!

PETER.
             Be it far from thee, Lord!
This shall not be!

CHRISTUS.
            Get thee behind me, Satan!
Thou savorest not the things that be of God,
But those that be of men!  If any will
Come after me, let him deny himself,
And daily take his cross, and follow me.
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it,
And whosoever will lose his life shall find it.
For wherein shall a man be profited
If he shall gain the whole world, and shall lose
Himself or be a castaway?

JAMES, after a long pause.
                          Why doth
The Master lead us up into this mountain?

PETER.
He goeth up to pray.

JOHN.
                 See where He standeth
Above us on the summit of the hill!
His face shines as the sun! and all his raiment
Exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller
On earth can white them!  He is not alone;
There are two with him there; two men of eld,
Their white beards blowing on the mountain air,
Are talking with him.

JAMES.
                    I am sore afraid!

PETER.
Who and whence are they?

JOHN.
                    Moses and Elias!

PETER.
O Master! it is good for us to be here!
If thou wilt, let us make three tabernacles;
For thee one, and for Moses and Elias!

JOHN.
Behold a bright cloud sailing in the sun!
It overshadows us.  A golden mist
Now hides them from us, and envelops us
And all the mountains in a luminous shadow!
I see no more.  The nearest rocks are hidden.

VOICE from the cloud.
Lo! this is my beloved Son!  Hear Him!

PETER.
It is the voice of God.  He speaketh to us,
As from the burning bush He spake to Moses!

JOHN.
The cloud-wreaths roll away.  The veil is lifted;
We see again.  Behold!  He is alone.
It was a vision that our eyes beheld,
And it hath vanished into the unseen.

CHRISTUS, coming down from the mountain.
I charge ye, tell the vision unto no one,
Till the Son of Man is risen from the dead!

PETER, aside.
Again He speaks of it!  What can it mean,
This rising from the dead?

JAMES.
                   Why say the Scribe!
Elias must first come?

CHRISTUS.
                      He cometh first,
Restoring all things.  But I say to you,
That this Elias is already come.
They knew him not, but have done unto him
Whate'er they listed, as is written of him.

PETER, aside.
It is of John the Baptist He is speaking.

JAMES.
As we descend, see, at the mountain's foot,
A crowd of people; coming, going, thronging
Round the disciples, that we left behind us,
Seeming impatient, that we stay so long.

PETER.
It is some blind man, or some paralytic
That waits the Master's coming to be healed.

JAMES.
I see a boy, who struggles and demeans him
As if an unclean spirit tormented him!

A CERTAIN MAN, running forward.
Lord! I beseech thee, look upon my son.
He is mine only child; a lunatic,
And sorely vexed; for oftentimes he falleth
Into the fire and oft into the water.
Wherever the dumb spirit taketh him
He teareth him.  He gnasheth with his teeth,
And pines away.  I spake to thy disciples
That they should cast him out, and they could not.

CHRISTUS.
O faithless generation and perverse!
How long shall I be with you, and suffer you?
Bring thy son hither.

BYSTANDERS.
                How the unclean spirit
Seizes the boy, and tortures him with pain!
He falleth to the ground and wallows, foaming!
He cannot live.

CHRISTUS.
                How long is it ago
Since this came unto him?

THE FATHER.
                       Even of a child.
Oh, have compassion on us, Lord, and help us,
If thou canst help us.

CHRISTUS.
                  If thou canst believe.
For unto him that verily believeth,
All things are possible.

THE FATHER.
                        Lord, I believe!
Help thou mine unbelief!

CHRISTUS.
               Dumb and deaf spirit,
Come out of him, I charge thee, and no more
Enter thou into him!

The boy utters a loud cry of pain, and then lies still.

BYSTANDERS.
                     How motionless
He lieth there.  No life is left in him.
His eyes are like a blind man's, that see not.
The boy is dead!

OTHERS.
           Behold! the Master stoops,
And takes him by the hand, and lifts him up.
He is not dead.

DISCIPLES.
         But one word from those lips,
But one touch of that hand, and he is healed!
Ah, why could we not do it?

THE FATHER.
                     My poor child!
Now thou art mine again.  The unclean spirit
Shall never more torment thee!  Look at me!
Speak unto me!  Say that thou knowest me!

DISCIPLES to CHRISTUS departing.
Good Master, tell us, for what reason was it
We could not cast him out?

CHRISTUS.
            Because of your unbelief!


VIII

THE YOUNG RULER

CHRISTUS.
Two men went up into the temple to pray.
The one was a self-righteous Pharisee,
The other a Publican.  And the Pharisee
Stood and prayed thus within himself: O God,
I thank thee I am not as other men,
Extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
Or even as this Publican.  I fast
Twice in the week, and also I give tithes
Of all that I possess!  The Publican,
Standing afar off, would not lift so much
Even as his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast,
Saying: God be merciful to me a sinner!
I tell you that this man went to his house
More justified than the other.  Every one
That doth exalt himself shall be abased,
And he that humbleth himself shall be exalted!

CHILDREN, among themselves.
Let us go nearer!  He is telling stories!
Let us go listen to them.

AN OLD JEW.
                   Children, children!
What are ye doing here?  Why do ye crowd us?
It was such little vagabonds as you
That followed Elisha, mucking him and crying:
Go up, thou bald-head!  But the bears--the bears
Came out of the wood, and tare them!

A MOTHER.
                      Speak not thus!
We brought them here, that He might lay his hands
On them, and bless them.

CHRISTUS.
                   Suffer little children
To come unto me, and forbid them not;
Of such is the kingdom of heaven; and their angels
Look always on my Father's face.

Takes them in his arms and blesses them.

A YOUNG RULER, running.
                       Good Master!
What good thing shall I do, that I may have
Eternal life?

CHRISTUS.
            Why callest thou me good?
There is none good but one, and that is God.
If thou wilt enter into life eternal,
Keep the commandments.

YOUNG RULER.
                   Which of them?

CHRISTUS.
                     Thou shalt not
Commit adultery; thou shalt not kill;
Thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not bear false witness;
Honor thy father and thy mother; and love
Thy neighbor as thyself.

YOUNG RULER.
                   From my youth up
All these things have I kept.  What lack I yet?

JOHN.
With what divine compassion in his eyes
The Master looks upon this eager youth,
As if he loved him!

CHRISTUS.
               Wouldst thou perfect be,
Sell all thou hast, and give it to the poor,
And come, take up thy cross, and follow me,
And thou shalt have thy treasure in the heavens.

JOHN.
Behold, how sorrowful he turns away!

CHRISTUS.
Children! how hard it is for them that trust
In riches to enter into the kingdom of God!
'T is easier for a camel to go through
A needle's eye, than for the rich to enter
The kingdom of God!

JOHN.
         Ah, who then can be saved?

CHRISTUS.
With men this is indeed impossible,
But unto God all things are possible!

PETER.
Behold, we have left all, and followed thee.
What shall we have therefor?

CHRISTUS.
                        Eternal life.


IX

AT BETHANY

MARTHA busy about household affairs.
MARY sitting at the feet of CHRISTUS.

MARTHA.
She sitteth idly at the Master's feet.
And troubles not herself with household cares.
'T is the old story.  When a guest arrives
She gives up all to be with him; while I
Must be the drudge, make ready the guest-chamber,
Prepare the food, set everything in order,
And see that naught is wanting in the house.
She shows her love by words, and I by works.

MARY.
O Master! when thou comest, it is always
A Sabbath in the house.  I cannot work;
I must sit at thy feet; must see thee, hear thee!
I have a feeble, wayward, doubting heart,
Incapable of endurance or great thoughts,
Striving for something that it cannot reach,
Baffled and disappointed, wounded, hungry;
And only when I hear thee am I happy,
And only when I see thee am at peace!
Stronger than I, and wiser, and far better
In every manner, is my sister Martha.
Thou seest how well she orders everything
To make thee welcome; how she comes and goes,
Careful and cumbered ever with much serving,
While I but welcome thee with foolish words!
Whene'er thou speakest to me, I am happy;
When thou art silent, I am satisfied.
Thy presence is enough.  I ask no more.
Only to be with thee, only to see thee,
Sufficeth me.  My heart is then at rest.
I wonder I am worthy of so much.

MARTHA.
Lord, dost thou care not that my sister Mary
Hath left me thus to wait on thee alone?
I pray thee, bid her help me.

CHRISTUS.
                       Martha, Martha,
Careful and troubled about many things
Art thou, and yet one thing alone is needful!
Thy sister Mary hath chosen that good part,
Which never shall be taken away from her!


X


BORN BLIND

A JEW.
Who is this beggar blinking in the sun?
Is it not he who used to sit and beg
By the Gate Beautiful?

ANOTHER.
                       It is the same.

A THIRD.
It is not he, but like him, for that beggar
Was blind from birth.  It cannot be the same.

THE BEGGAR.
Yea, I am he.

A JEW.
   How have thine eyes been opened?

THE BEGGAR.
A man that is called Jesus made a clay
And put it on mine eyes, and said to me:
Go to Siloam's Pool and wash thyself.
I went and washed, and I received my sight.

A JEW.
Where is he?

THE BEGGAR.
            I know not.

PHARISEES.
                 What is this crowd
Gathered about a beggar?  What has happened?

A JEW.
Here is a man who hath been blind from birth,
And now he sees.  He says a man called Jesus
Hath healed him.

PHARISEES.
           As God liveth, the Nazarene!
How was this done?

THE BEGGAR.
                 Rabboni, he put clay
Upon mine eyes; I washed, and now I see.

PHARISEES.
When did he this?

THE BEGGAR.
               Rabboni, yesterday.

PHARISEES.
The Sabbath day.  This man is not of God,
Because he keepeth not the Sabbath day!

A JEW.
How can a man that is a sinner do
Such miracles?

PHARISEES.
            What dost thou say of him
That hath restored thy sight?

THE BEGGAR.
                      He is a Prophet.

A JEW.
This is a wonderful story, but not true,
A beggar's fiction.  He was not born blind,
And never has been blind!

OTHERS.
                Here are his parents.
Ask them.

PHARISEES.
          Is this your son?

THE PARENTS.
                        Rabboni, yea;
We know this is our son.

PHARISEES.
                  Was he born blind?

THE PARENTS.
He was born blind.

PHARISEES.
          Then how doth he now see?

THE PARENTS, aside.
What answer shall we make?  If we confess
It was the Christ, we shall be driven forth
Out of the Synagogue!
                  We know, Rabboni,
This is our son, and that he was born blind;
But by what means he seeth, we know not,
Or who his eyes hath opened, we know not.
He is of age; ask him; we cannot say;
He shall speak for himself.

PHARISEES.
                   Give God the praise!
We know the man that healed thee is a sinner!

THE BEGGAR.
Whether He be a sinner, I know not;
One thing I know; that whereas I was blind,
I now do see.

PHARISEES.
            How opened he thine eyes?
What did he do?

THE BEGGAR.
               I have already told you.
Ye did not hear: why would ye hear again?
Will ye be his disciples?

PHARISEES.
                         God of Moses!
Are we demoniacs, are we halt or blind,
Or palsy-stricken, or lepers, or the like,
That we should join the Synagogue of Satan,
And follow jugglers?  Thou art his disciple,
But we are disciples of Moses; and we know
That God spake unto Moses; but this fellow,
We know not whence he is!

THE BEGGAR.
                       Why, herein is
A marvellous thing!  Ye know not whence he is,
Yet he hath opened mine eyes!  We know that God
Heareth not sinners; but if any man
Doeth God's will, and is his worshipper,
Him doth he hear.  Oh, since the world began
It was not heard that any man hath opened
The eyes of one that was born blind.  If He
Were not of God, surely he could do nothing!

PHARISEES.
Thou, who wast altogether born in sins
And in iniquities, dost thou teach us?
Away with thee out of the holy places,
Thou reprobate, thou beggar, thou blasphemer!

THE BEGGAR is cast out.


XI

SIMON MAGUS AND HELEN OF TYRE

On the house-top at Endor.  Night.  A lighted lantern on a table.

SIMON.
Swift are the blessed Immortals to the mortal
That perseveres!  So doth it stand recorded
In the divine Chaldaean Oracles
Of Zoroaster, once Ezekiel's slave,
Who in his native East betook himself
To lonely meditation, and the writing
On the dried skins of oxen the Twelve Books
Of the Avesta and the Oracles!
Therefore I persevere; and I have brought thee
From the great city of Tyre, where men deride
The things they comprehend not, to this plain
Of Esdraelon, in the Hebrew tongue
Called Armageddon, and this town of Endor,
Where men believe; where all the air is full
Of marvellous traditions, and the Enchantress
That summoned up the ghost of Samuel
Is still remembered.  Thou hast seen the land;
Is it not fair to look on?

HELEN.
                        It is fair,
Yet not so fair as Tyre.

SIMON.
                    Is not Mount Tabor
As beautiful as Carmel by the Sea?

HELEN.
It is too silent and too solitary;
I miss the tumult of the street; the sounds
Of traffic, and the going to and fro
Of people in gay attire, with cloaks of purple,
And gold and silver jewelry!

SIMON.
                            Inventions
Of Abriman, the spirit of the dark,
The Evil Spirit!

HELEN.
                 I regret the gossip
Of friends and neighbors at the open door
On summer nights.

SIMON.
              An idle waste of time.

HELEN.
The singing and the dancing, the delight
Of music and of motion.  Woe is me,
To give up all these pleasures, and to lead
The life we lead!

SIMON.
            Thou canst not raise thyself
Up to the level of my higher thought,
And though possessing thee, I still remain
Apart from thee, and with thee, am alone
In my high dreams.

HELEN.
              Happier was I in Tyre.
Oh, I remember how the gallant ships
Came sailing in, with ivory, gold, and silver,
And apes and peacocks; and the singing sailors,
And the gay captains with their silken dresses,
Smelling of aloes, myrrh, and cinnamon!

SIMON.
But the dishonor, Helen!  Let the ships
Of Tarshish howl for that!

HELEN.
                  And what dishonor?
Remember Rahab, and how she became
The ancestress of the great Psalmist David;
And wherefore should not I, Helen of Tyre,
Attain like honor?

SIMON.
                Thou art Helen of Tyre,
And hast been Helen of Troy, and hast been Rahab,
The Queen of Sheha, and Semiramis,
And Sara of seven husbands, and Jezebel,
And other women of the like allurements;
And now thou art Minerva, the first Aeon,
The Mother of Angels!

HELEN.
                  And the concubine
Of Simon the Magician!  Is it honor
For one who has been all these noble dames,
To tramp about the dirty villages
And cities of Samaria with a juggler?
A charmer of serpents?

SIMON.
                He who knows himself
Knows all things in himself.  I have charmed thee,
Thou beautiful asp: yet am I no magician,
I am the Power of God, and the Beauty of God!
I am the Paraclete, the Comforter!

HELEN.
Illusions!  Thou deceiver, self-deceived!
Thou dost usurp the titles of another;
Thou art not what thou sayest.

SIMON.
                           Am I not?
Then feel my power.

HELEN.
Would I had ne'er left Tyre!

He looks at her, and she sinks into a deep sleep.

SIMON.
Go, see it in thy dreams, fair unbeliever!
And leave me unto mine, if they be dreams,
That take such shapes before me, that I see them;
These effable and ineffable impressions
Of the mysterious world, that come to me
From the elements of Fire and Earth and Water,
And the all-nourishing Ether!  It is written,
Look not on Nature, for her name is fatal!
Yet there are Principles, that make apparent
The images of unapparent things,
And the impression of vague characters
And visions most divine appear in ether.
So speak the Oracles; then wherefore fatal?
I take this orange-bough, with its five leaves,
Each equidistant on the upright stem;
And I project them on a plane below,
In the circumference of a circle drawn
About a centre where the stem is planted,
And each still equidistant from the other,
As if a thread of gossamer were drawn
Down from each leaf, and fastened with a pin.
Now if from these five points a line be traced
To each alternate point, we shall obtain
The Pentagram, or Solomon's Pentangle,
A charm against all witchcraft, and a sign,
Which on the banner of Antiochus
Drove back the fierce barbarians of the North,
Demons esteemed, and gave the Syrian King
The sacred name of Soter, or of Savior.
Thus Nature works mysteriously with man;
And from the Eternal One, as from a centre,
All things proceed, in fire, air, earth, and water,
And all are subject to one law, which, broken
Even in a single point, is broken in all;
Demons rush in, and chaos comes again.
By this will I compel the stubborn spirits,
That guard the treasures, hid in caverns deep
On Gerizim, by Uzzi the High-Priest,
The ark and holy vessels, to reveal
Their secret unto me, and to restore
These precious things to the Samaritans.
A mist is rising from the plain below me,
And as I look, the vapors shape themselves
Into strange figures, as if unawares
My lips had breathed the Tetragrammaton,
And from their graves, o'er all the battlefields
Of Armageddon, the long-buried captains
Had started, with their thousands, and ten thousands,
And rushed together to renew their wars,
Powerless, and weaponless, and without a sound!
Wake, Helen, from thy sleep!  The air grows cold;
Let us go down.

HELEN, awaking.
           Oh, would I were at home!

SIMON.
Thou sayest that I usurp another's titles.
In youth I saw the Wise Men of the East,
Magalath and Pangalath and Saracen,
Who followed the bright star, but home returned
For fear of Herod by another way.
O shining worlds above me! in what deep
Recesses of your realms of mystery
Lies hidden now that star? and where are they
That brought the gifts of frankincense and myrrh?

HELEN.
The Nazarene still liveth.

SIMON.
                        We have heard
His name in many towns, but have not seen Him.
He flits before us; tarries not; is gone
When we approach, like something unsubstantial,
Made of the air, and fading into air.
He is at Nazareth, He is at Nain,
Or at the Lovely Village on the Lake,
Or sailing on its waters.

HELEN.
                        So say those
Who do not wish to find Him.

SIMON.
                         Can this be
The King of Israel, whom the Wise Men worshipped?
Or does He fear to meet me?  It would seem so.
We should soon learn which of us twain usurps
The titles of the other, as thou sayest.

They go down.



THE THIRD PASSOVER

I

THE ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM

THE SYRO-PHOENICIAN WOMAN and her DAUGHTER
on the house-top at  Jerusalem.

THE DAUGHTER, singing.
Blind Bartimeus at the gates
Of Jericho in darkness waits;
He hears the crowd;--he hears a breath
Say, It is Christ of Nazareth!
And calls, in tones of agony,
[Greek text]!

The thronging multitudes increase:
Blind Bartimeus, hold thy peace!
But still, above the noisy crowd,
The beggar's cry is shrill and loud;
Until they say, he calleth thee!
[Greek text]!

Then saith the Christ, as silent stands
The crowd, What wilt thou at my hands?
And he replies, Oh, give me light!
Rabbi, restore the blind man's sight!
And Jesus answers, [Greek text]!

Ye that have eyes, yet cannot see,
In darkness and in misery,
Recall those mighty voices three,
[Greek text]!
[Greek text]!
[Greek text]!

THE MOTHER.
Thy faith hath saved thee!  Ah, how true that is!
For I had faith; and when the Master came
Into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, fleeing
From those who sought to slay him, I went forth
And cried unto Him, saying: Have mercy on me,
O Lord, thou Son of David! for my daughter
Is grievously tormented with a devil.
But he passed on, and answered not a word.
And his disciples said, beseeching Him:
Send her away!  She crieth after us!
And then the Master answered them and said:
I am not sent but unto the lost sheep
Of the House of Israel!  Then I worshipped Him,
Saying: Lord help me!  And He answered me,
It is not meet to take the children's bread
And cast it unto dogs!  Truth, Lord, I said;
And yet the dogs may eat the crumbs which fall
From off their master's table; and he turned,
And answered me; and said to me: O woman,
Great is thy faith; then be it unto thee
Even as thou wilt.  And from that very hour
Thou wast made whole, my darling! my delight!

THE DAUGHTER.
There came upon my dark and troubled mind
A calm, as when the tumult of the City
Suddenly ceases, and I lie and hear
The silver trumpets of the Temple blowing
Their welcome to the Sabbath.  Still I wonder,
That one who was so far away from me
And could not see me, by his thought alone
Had power to heal me.  Oh that I could see Him!

THE MOTHER.
Perhaps thou wilt; for I have brought thee here
To keep the holy Passover, and lay
Thine offering of thanksgiving on the altar.
Thou mayst both see and hear Him.  Hark!

VOICES afar off.
                 Hosanna!

THE DAUGHTER.
A crowd comes pouring through the city gate!
O mother, look!

VOICES in the street.
                      Hosanna to the Son
Of David!

THE DAUGHTER.
          A great multitude of people
Fills all the street; and riding on an ass
Comes one of noble aspect, like a king!
The people spread their garments in the way,
And scatter branches of the palm-trees!

VOICES.
                               Blessed
Is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!
Hosanna in the highest!

OTHER VOICES.
                        Who is this?

VOICES.
Jesus of Nazareth!

THE DAUGHTER.
                  Mother, it is he!

VOICES.
He hath called Lazarus of Bethany
Out of his grave, and raised him from the dead!
Hosanna in the highest!

PHARISEES.
                       Ye perceive
That nothing we prevail.  Behold, the world
Is all gone after him!

THE DAUGHTER.
                     What majesty,
What power is in that care-worn countenance!
What sweetness, what compassion!  I no longer
Wonder that he hath healed me!

VOICES.
                     Peace in heaven,
And glory in the highest!

PHARISEES.
                      Rabbi!  Rabbi!
Rebuke thy followers!

CHRISTUS.
         Should they hold their peace
The very stones beneath us would cry out!

THE DAUGHTER.
All hath passed by me like a dream of wonder!
But I have seen Him, and have heard his voice,
And I am satisfied!  I ask no more!


II

SOLOMON'S PORCH

GAMALIEL THE SCRIBE.
When Rabban Simeon--upon whom be peace!--
Taught in these Schools, he boasted that his pen
Had written no word that he could call his own,
But wholly and always had been consecrated
To the transcribing of the Law and Prophets.
He used to say, and never tired of saying,
The world itself was built upon the Law.
And ancient Hillel said, that whosoever
Gains a good name gains something for himself,
But he who gains a knowledge of the Law
Gains everlasting life.  And they spake truly.
Great is the Written Law; but greater still
The Unwritten, the Traditions of the Elders,
The lovely words of Levites, spoken first
To Moses on the Mount, and handed down
From mouth to mouth, in one unbroken sound
And sequence of divine authority,
The voice of God resounding through the ages.

The Written Law is water; the Unwritten
Is precious wine; the Written Law is salt,
The Unwritten costly spice; the Written Law
Is but the body; the Unwritten, the soul
That quickens it and makes it breathe and live.
I can remember, many years ago,
A little bright-eyed school-boy, a mere stripling,
Son of a Galilean carpenter,
From Nazareth, I think, who came one day
And sat here in the Temple with the Scribes,
Hearing us speak, and asking many questions,
And we were all astonished at his quickness.
And when his mother came, and said: Behold
Thy father and I have sought thee, sorrowing;
He looked as one astonished, and made answer,
How is it that ye sought me?  Wist ye not
That I must be about my Father's business?
Often since then I see him here among us,
Or dream I see him, with his upraised face
Intent and eager, and I often wonder
Unto what manner of manhood he hath grown!
Perhaps a poor mechanic like his father,
Lost in his little Galilean village
And toiling at his craft, to die unknown
And he no more remembered among men.

CHRISTUS, in the outer court.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat;
All, therefore, whatsoever they command you,
Observe and do; but follow not their works
They say and do not.  They bind heavy burdens
And very grievous to be borne, and lay them
Upon men's shoulders, but they move them not
With so much as a finger!

GAMALIEL, looking forth.
                         Who is this
Exhorting in the outer courts so loudly?

CHRISTUS.
Their works they do for to be seen of men.
They make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge
The borders of their garments, and they love
The uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats
In Synagogues, and greetings in the markets,
And to be called of all men Rabbi, Rabbi!

GAMALIEL.
It is that loud and turbulent Galilean,
That came here at the Feast of Dedication,
And stirred the people up to break the Law!

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom
Of heaven, and neither go ye in yourselves
Nor suffer them that are entering to go in!

GAMALIEL.
How eagerly the people throng and listen,
As if his ribald words were words of wisdom!

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! for ye devour the houses
Of widows, and for pretence ye make long prayers;
Therefore shall ye receive the more damnation.

GAMALIEL.
This brawler is no Jew,--he is a vile
Samaritan, and hath an unclean spirit!

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! ye compass sea and land
To make one proselyte, and when he is made
Ye make him twofold more the child of hell
Than you yourselves are!

GAMALIEL.
               O my father's father!
Hillel of blessed memory, hear and judge!

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint,
Of anise, and of cumin, and omit
The weightier matters of the law of God,
Judgment and faith and mercy; and all these
Ye ought to have done, nor leave undone the others!

GAMALIEL.
O Rabban Simeon! how must thy bones
Stir in their grave to hear such blasphemies!

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes, and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! for ye make clean and sweet
The outside of the cup and of the platter,
But they within are full of all excess!

GAMALIEL.
Patience of God! canst thou endure so long?
Or art thou deaf, or gone upon a journey?

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! for ye are very like
To whited sepulchres, which indeed appear
Beautiful outwardly, but are within
Filled full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness!

GAMALIEL.
Am I awake?  Is this Jerusalem?
And are these Jews that throng and stare and listen?

CHRISTUS.
Woe unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees,
Ye hypocrites! because ye build the tombs
Of prophets, and adorn the sepulchres
Of righteous men, and say: if we had lived
When lived our fathers, we would not have been
Partakers with them in the blood of Prophets.
So ye be witnesses unto yourselves,
That ye are children of them that killed the Prophets!
Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
I send unto you Prophets and Wise Men,
And Scribes, and some ye crucify, and some
Scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute
From city to city; that on you may come
The righteous blood that hath been shed on earth,
From the blood of righteous Abel to the blood
Of Zacharias, son of Barachias,
Ye slew between the Temple and the altar!

GAMALIEL.
Oh, had I here my subtle dialectician,
My little Saul of Tarsus, the tent-maker,
Whose wit is sharper than his needle's point,
He would delight to foil this noisy wrangler!

CHRISTUS.
Jerusalem! Jerusalem! O thou
That killest the Prophets, and that stonest them
Which are sent unto thee, how often would I
Have gathered together thy children, as a hen
Gathereth her chickens underneath her wing,
And ye would not!  Behold, your house is left
Unto you desolate!

THE PEOPLE.
                   This is a Prophet!
This is the Christ that was to come!

GAMALIEL.
                              Ye fools!
Think ye, shall Christ come out of Galilee?


III

LORD, IS IT I?


CHRISTUS.
One of you shall betray me.

THE DISCIPLES.
                           Is it I?
Lord, is it I?

CHRISTUS.
               One of the Twelve it is
That dippeth with me in this dish his hand;
He shall betray me.  Lo, the Son of Man
Goeth indeed as it is written of Him;
But woe shall be unto that man by whom
He is betrayed!  Good were it for that man
If he had ne'er been born!

JUDAS ISCARIOT.
                         Lord, is it I?

CHRISTUS.
Ay, thou hast said.  And that thou doest, do quickly.

JUDAS ISCARIOT, going out.
Ah, woe is me!

CHRISTUS.
              All ye shall be offended
Because of me this night; for it is written:
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd!  Smite
The shepherd, saith the Lord of hosts, and scattered
Shall be the sheep!--But after I am risen
I go before you into Galilee.

PETER.
O Master! though all men shall be offended
Because of thee, yet will not I be!

CHRISTUS.
                                 Simon,
Behold how Satan hath desired to have you,
That he may sift you as one sifteth wheat!
Whither I go thou canst not follow me--
Not now; but thou shalt follow me hereafter.

PETER.
Wherefore can I not follow thee?  I am ready
To go with thee to prison and to death.

CHRISTUS.
Verily I say unto thee, this night,
Ere the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice!

PETER.
Though I should die, yet will I not deny thee.

CHRISTUS.
When first I sent you forth without a purse,
Or scrip, or shoes, did ye lack anything?

THE DISCIPLES.
Not anything.

CHRISTUS.
             But he that hath a purse,
Now let him take it, and likewise his scrip;
And he that hath no sword, let him go sell
His clothes and buy one.  That which hath been written
Must be accomplished now: He hath poured out
His soul even unto death; he hath been numbered
With the transgressors, and himself hath borne
The sin of many, and made intercession
For the transgressors.  And here have an end
The things concerning me.

PETER.
                     Behold, O Lord,
Behold here are two swords!

CHRISTUS.
                          It is enough.



IV

THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE

CHRISTUS.
My spirit is exceeding sorrowful
Even unto death!  Tarry ye here and watch.

He goes apart.

PETER.
Under this ancient olive-tree, that spreads
Its broad centennial branches like a tent,
Let us lie down and rest.

JOHN.
                What are those torches,
That glimmer on Brook Kedron there below us?

JAMES.
It is some marriage feast; the joyful maidens
Go out to meet the bridegroom.

PETER.
                         I am weary.
The struggles of this day have overcome me.

They sleep.

CHRISTUS, falling on his face.
Father! all things are possible to thee,--
Oh let this cup pass from me!  Nevertheless
Not as I will, but as thou wilt, be done!

Returning to the Disciples.

What! could ye not watch with me for one hour?
Oh watch and pray, that ye may enter not
Into temptation.  For the spirit indeed
Is willing, but the flesh is weak!

JOHN.
                             Alas!
It is for sorrow that our eyes are heavy.--
I see again the glimmer of those torches
Among the olives; they are coming hither.

JAMES.
Outside the garden wall the path divides;
Surely they come not hither.

They sleep again.

CHRISTUS, as before.
                     O my Father!
If this cup may not pass away from me,
Except I drink of it, thy will be done.

Returning to the Disciples.

Sleep on; and take your rest!

JOHN.
                     Beloved Master,
Alas! we know not what to answer thee!
It is for sorrow that our eves are heavy.--
Behold, the torches now encompass us.

JAMES.
They do but go about the garden wall,
Seeking for some one, or for something lost.

They sleep again.

CHRISTUS, as before.
If this cup may not pass away from me,
Except I drink of it, thy will be done.

Returning to the Disciples.

It is enough!  Behold, the Son of Man
Hath been betrayed into the hands of sinners!
The hour is come.  Rise up, let us be going;
For he that shall betray me is at hand.

JOHN.
Ah me!  See, from his forehead, in the torchlight,
Great drops of blood are falling to the ground!

PETER.
What lights are these?  What torches glare and glisten
Upon the swords and armor of these men?
And there among them Judas Iscariot!

He smites the servant of the High-Priest with his sword.

CHRISTUS.
Put up thy sword into its sheath; for they
That take the sword shall perish with the sword.
The cup my Father hath given me to drink,
Shall I not drink it?  Think'st thou that I cannot
Pray to my Father, and that he shall give me
More than twelve legions of angels presently!

JUDAS to CHRISTUS, kissing him.
Hail, Master! hail!

CHRISTUS.
     Friend, wherefore art thou come?
Whom seek ye?

CAPTAIN OF THE TEMPLE.
              Jesus of Nazareth.

CHRISTUS.
                         I am he.
Are ye come hither as against a thief,
With swords and staves to take me?  When I daily
Was with you in the Temple, ye stretched forth
No hands to take me!  But this is your hour,
And this the power of darkness.  If ye seek
Me only, let these others go their way.

The Disciples depart.  CHRISTUS is bound and led away.  A certain
young man follows him, having a linen cloth cast about his
body.  They lay hold of him, and the young man flees from them
naked.


V

THE PALACE OF CAIAPHAS


PHARISEES.
What do we?  Clearly something must we do,
For this man worketh many miracles.

CAIAPHAS.
I am informed that he is a mechanic;
A carpenter's son; a Galilean peasant,
Keeping disreputable company.

PHARISEES.
The people say that here in Bethany
He hath raised up a certain Lazarus,
Who had been dead three days.

CAIAPHAS.
                         Impossible!
There is no resurrection of the dead;
This Lazarus should be taken, and put to death
As an impostor.  If this Galilean
Would be content to stay in Galilee,
And preach in country towns, I should not heed him.
But when he comes up to Jerusalem
Riding in triumph, as I am informed,
And drives the money-changers from the Temple,
That is another matter.

PHARISEES.
                        If we thus
Let him alone, all will believe on him,
And then the Romans come and take away
Our place and nation.

CAIAPHAS.
              Ye know nothing at all.
Simon Ben Camith, my great predecessor,
On whom be peace! would have dealt presently
With such a demagogue.  I shall no less.
The man must die.  Do ye consider not
It is expedient that one man should die,
Not the whole nation perish?  What is death?
It differeth from sleep but in duration.
We sleep and wake again; an hour or two
Later or earlier, and it matters not,
And if we never wake it matters not;
When we are in our graves we are at peace,
Nothing can wake us or disturb us more.
There is no resurrection.

PHARISEES, aside.
                        O most faithful
Disciple of Hircanus Maccabaeus,
Will nothing but complete annihilation
Comfort and satisfy thee?

CAIAPHAS.
                 While ye are talking
And plotting, and contriving how to take him,
Fearing the people, and so doing naught,
I, who fear not the people, have been acting;
Have taken this Prophet, this young Nazarene,
Who by Beelzebub the Prince of devils
Casteth out devils, and doth raise the dead,
That might as well be dead, and left in peace.
Annas my father-in-law hath sent him hither.
I hear the guard.  Behold your Galilean!

CHRISTUS is brought in bound.

SERVANT, in the vestibule.
Why art thou up so late, my pretty damsel?

DAMSEL.
Why art thou up so early, pretty man?
It is not cock-crow yet, and art thou stirring?

SERVANT.
What brings thee here?

DAMSEL.
              What brings the rest of you?

SERVANT.
Come here and warm thy hands.

DAMSEL to PETER.
                    Art thou not
One of this man's also disciples?

PETER.
                                I am not.

DAMSEL.
Now surely thou art also one of them;
Thou art a Galilean, and thy speech
Betrayeth thee.

PETER.
Woman, I know him not!

CAIAPHAS to CHRISTUS, in the Hall.
Who art thou?  Tell us plainly of thyself
And of thy doctrines, and of thy disciples.

CHRISTUS.
Lo, I have spoken openly to the world,
I have taught ever in the Synagogue,
And in the Temple, where the Jews resort
In secret have said nothing.  Wherefore then
Askest thou me of this?  Ask them that heard me
What I have said to them.  Behold, they know
What I have said!

OFFICER, striking him,
        What, fellow! answerest thou
The High-Priest so?

CHRISTUS.
                 If I have spoken evil,
Bear witness of the evil; but if well,
Why smitest thou me?

CAIAPHAS.
             Where are the witnesses?
Let them say what they know.

THE TWO FALSE WITNESSES.
                  We heard him say:
I will destroy this Temple made with hands,
And will within three days build up another
Made without hands.

SCRIBES and PHARISEES.
        He is o'erwhelmed with shame
And cannot answer!

CAIAPHAS.
             Dost thou answer nothing?
What is this thing they witness here against thee?

SCRIBES and PHARISEES.
He holds his peace.

CAIAPHAS.
           Tell us, art thou the Christ?
I do adjure thee by the living God,
Tell us, art thou indeed the Christ?

CHRISTUS.
                                  I am.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man
Sit on the right hand of the power of God,
And come in clouds of heaven!

CAIAPHAS, rending his clothes.
                         It is enough.
He hath spoken blasphemy!  What further need
Have we of witnesses?  Now ye have heard
His blasphemy.  What think ye?  Is he guilty?

SCRIBES and PHARISEES.
Guilty of death!

KINSMAN OF MALCHUS to PETER in the vestibule.
                Surely I know thy face,
Did I not see thee in the garden with him?

PETER.
How couldst thou see me?  I swear unto thee
I do not know this man of whom ye speak!

The cock crows.

Hark! the cock crows!  That sorrowful, pale face
Seeks for me in the crowd, and looks at me,
As if He would remind me of those words:
Ere the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice!

Goes out weeping.  CHRISTUS is blindfolded and buffeted.

AN OFFICER, striking him with his palm.
Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, thou Prophet!
Who is it smote thee?

CAIAPHAS.
                Lead him unto Pilate!


VI

PONTIUS PILATE

PILATE.
Wholly incomprehensible to me,
Vainglorious, obstinate, and given up
To unintelligible old traditions,
And proud, and self-conceited are these Jews!
Not long ago, I marched the legions
Down from Caesarea to their winter-quarters
Here in Jerusalem, with the effigies
Of Caesar on their ensigns, and a tumult
Arose among these Jews, because their Law
Forbids the making of all images!
They threw themselves upon the ground with wild
Expostulations, bared their necks, and cried
That they would sooner die than have their Law
Infringed in any manner; as if Numa
Were not as great as Moses, and the Laws
Of the Twelve Tables as their Pentateuch!

And then, again, when I desired to span
Their valley with an aqueduct, and bring
A rushing river in to wash the city
And its inhabitants,--they all rebelled
As if they had been herds of unwashed swine!
Thousands and thousands of them got together
And raised so great a clamor round my doors,
That, fearing violent outbreak, I desisted,
And left them to their wallowing in the mire.

And now here comes the reverend Sanhedrim
Of lawyers, priests, and Scribes and Pharisees,
Like old and toothless mastiffs, that can bark
But cannot bite, howling their accusations
Against a mild enthusiast, who hath preached
I know not what new doctrine, being King
Of some vague kingdom in the other world,
That hath no more to do with Rome and Caesar
Than I have with the patriarch Abraham!
Finding this man to be a Galilean
I sent him straight to Herod, and I hope
That is the last of it; but if it be not,
I still have power to pardon and release him,
As is the custom at the Passover,
And so accommodate the matter smoothly,
Seeming to yield to them, yet saving him,
A prudent and sagacious policy
For Roman Governors in the Provinces.

Incomprehensible, fanatic people!
Ye have a God, who seemeth like yourselves
Incomprehensible, dwelling apart,
Majestic, cloud-encompassed, clothed in darkness!
One whom ye fear, but love not; yet ye have
No Goddesses to soften your stern lives,
And make you tender unto human weakness,
While we of Rome have everywhere around us
Our amiable divinities, that haunt
The woodlands, and the waters, and frequent
Our households, with their sweet and gracious presence!
I will go in, and, while these Jews are wrangling,
Read my Ovidius on the Art of Love.


VII

BARABBAS IN PRISON

BARABBAS, to his fellow-prisoners
Barabbas is my name,
Barabbas, the Son of Shame,
  Is the meaning, I suppose;
I'm no better than the best,
And whether worse than the rest
  Of my fellow-men, who knows?

I was once, to say it in brief,
A highwayman, a robber-chief,
  In the open light of day.
So much I am free to confess;
But all men, more or less,
  Are robbers in their way.

From my cavern in the crags,
From my lair of leaves and flags,
  I could see, like ants, below,
The camels with their load
Of merchandise, on the road
  That leadeth to Jericho.

And I struck them unaware,
As an eagle from the air
  Drops down upon bird or beast;
And I had my heart's desire
Of the merchants of Sidon and Tyre,
  And Damascus and the East.

But it is not for that I fear;
It is not for that I am here
  In these iron fetters bound;
Sedition! that is the word
That Pontius Pilate heard,
  And he liketh not the sound.

What think ye, would he care
For a Jew slain here or there,
  Or a plundered caravan?
But Caesar!--ah, that is a crime,
To the uttermost end of time
  Shall not be forgiven to man.

Therefore was Herod wroth
With Matthias Margaloth,
  And burned him for a show!
Therefore his wrath did smite
Judas the Gaulonite,
  And his followers, as ye know.

For that cause and no more,
Am I here, as I said before;
  For one unlucky night,
Jucundus, the captain of horse,
Was upon us with all his force,
  And I was caught in the flight,

I might have fled with the rest,
But my dagger was in the breast
  Of a Roman equerry,
As we rolled there in the street,
They bound me, hands and feet
  And this is the end of me.

Who cares for death?  Not I!
A thousand times I would die,
  Rather than suffer wrong!
Already those women of mine
Are mixing the myrrh and the wine;
  I shall not be with you long.


VIII

ECCE HOMO

PILATE, on the tessellated pavement in front of his palace.
Ye have brought unto me this man, as one
Who doth pervert the people; and behold!
I have examined him, and found no fault
Touching the things whereof ye do accuse him.
No, nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him,
And nothing worthy of death he findeth in him.
Ye have a custom at the Passover;
That one condemned to death shall be released.
Whom will ye, then, that I release to you?
Jesus Barabbas, called the Son of Shame,
Or Jesus, Son of Joseph, called the Christ?

THE PEOPLE, shouting.
Not this man, but Barabbas!

PILATE.
                     What then will ye
That I should do with him that is called Christ?

THE PEOPLE.
Crucify him!

PILATE.
         Why, what evil hath he done?
Lo, I have found no cause of death in him;
I will chastise him, and then let him go.

THE PEOPLE, more vehemently.
Crucify him! crucify him!

A MESSENGER, to PILATE.
                       Thy wife sends
This message to thee,--Have thou naught to do
With that just man; for I this day in dreams
Have suffered many things because of him.

PILATE, aside.
The Gods speak to us in our dreams!  I tremble
At what I have to do!  O Claudia,
How shall I save him?  Yet one effort more,
Or he must perish!

Washes his hands before them.

                    I am innocent
Of the blood of this just person; see ye to it!

THE PEOPLE.
Let his blood be on us and on our children!

VOICES, within the palace.
Put on thy royal robes; put on thy crown,
And take thy sceptre!  Hail, thou King of the Jews!

PILATE.
I bring him forth to you, that ye may know
I find no fault in him.  Behold the man!

CHRISTUS is led in with the purple robe and crown of thorns.

CHIEF PRIESTS and OFFICERS.
Crucify him! crucify him!

PILATE.
                       Take ye him;
I find no fault in him.

CHIEF PRIESTS.
                     We have a Law,
And by our Law he ought to die; because
He made himself to be the Son of God.

PILATE, aside.
Ah! there are Sons of God, and demigods
More than ye know, ye ignorant High-Priests!

To CHRISTUS.
Whence art thou?

CHIEF PRIESTS.
            Crucify him! crucify him!

PILATE, to CHRISTUS.
Dost thou not answer me?  Dost thou not know
That I have power enough to crucify thee?
That I have also power to set thee free?

CHRISTUS.
Thou couldst have no power at all against me
Except that it were given thee from above;
Therefore hath he that sent me unto thee
The greater sin.

CHIEF PRIESTS.
               If thou let this man go,
Thou art not Caesar's friend.  For whosoever
Maketh himself a King, speaks against Caesar.

PILATE.
Ye Jews, behold your King!

CHIEF PRIESTS.
                    Away with him!
Crucify him!

PILATE.
           Shall I crucify your King?

CHIEF PRIESTS.
We have no King but Caesar!

PILATE.
                      Take him, then,
Take him, ye cruel and bloodthirsty priests,
More merciless than the plebeian mob,
Who pity and spare the fainting gladiator
Blood-stained in Roman amphitheatres,--
Take him, and crucify him if ye will;
But if the immortal Gods do ever mingle
With the affairs of mortals, which I doubt not,
And hold the attribute of justice dear,
They will commission the Eumenides
To scatter you to the four winds of heaven,
Exacting tear for tear, and blood for blood.
Here, take ye this inscription, Priests, and nail it
Upon the cross, above your victim's head:
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.

CHIEF PRIESTS.
Nay, we entreat! write not, the King of the Jews!
But that he said: I am the King of the Jews!

PILATE.
Enough.  What I have written, I have written.


IX

ACELDAMA

JUDAS ISCARIOT.
Lost! Lost!  Forever lost!  I have betrayed
The innocent blood!  O God! if thou art love,
Why didst thou leave me naked to the tempter?
Why didst thou not commission thy swift lightning
To strike me dead? or why did I not perish
With those by Herod slain, the innocent children,
Who went with playthings in their little hands
Into the darkness of the other world,
As if to bed?  Or wherefore was I born,
If thou in thy foreknowledge didst perceive
All that I am, and all that I must be?
I know I am not generous, am not gentle,
Like other men; but I have tried to be,
And I have failed.  I thought by following him
I should grow like him; but the unclean spirit
That from my childhood up hath tortured me
Hath been too cunning and too strong for me,
Am I to blame for this?  Am I to blame
Because I cannot love, and ne'er have known
The love of woman or the love of children?
It is a curse and a fatality,
A mark that hath been set upon my forehead,
That none shall slay me, for it were a mercy
That I were dead, or never had been born.

Too late! too late!  I shall not see Him more
Among the living.  That sweet, patient face
Will never more rebuke me, nor those lips
Repeat the words: One of you shall betray me!
It stung me into madness.  How I loved,
Yet hated Him: But in the other world!
I will be there before Him, and will wait
Until he comes, and fall down on my knees
And kiss his feet, imploring pardon, pardon!

I heard Him say: All sins shall be forgiven,
Except the sin against the Holy Ghost.
That shall not be forgiven in this world,
Nor in the world to come.  Is that my sin?
Have I offended so there is no hope
Here nor hereafter?  That I soon shall know.
O God, have mercy!  Christ have mercy on me!

Throws himself headlong from the cliff.


X

THE THREE CROSSES

MANAHEM, THE ESSENIAN.
Three crosses in this noonday night uplifted,
Three human figures that in mortal pain
Gleam white against the supernatural darkness;
Two thieves, that writhe in torture, and between them
The Suffering Messiah, the Son of Joseph,
Ay, the Messiah Triumphant, Son of David!
A crown of thorns on that dishonored head!
Those hands that healed the sick now pierced with nails,
Those feet that wandered homeless through the world
Now crossed and bleeding, and at rest forever!
And the three faithful Maries, overwhelmed
By this great sorrow, kneeling, praying weeping!
O Joseph Caiaphas, thou great High-Priest
How wilt thou answer for this deed of blood?

SCRIBES and ELDERS.
Thou that destroyest the Temple, and dost build it
In three days, save thyself; and if thou be
The Son of God, come down now from the cross.

CHIEF PRIESTS.
Others he saved, himself he cannot save!
Let Christ the King of Israel descend
That we may see and believe!

SCRIBES and ELDERS.
                   In God he trusted;
Let Him deliver him, if He will have him,
And we will then believe.

CHRISTUS.
                Father! forgive them;
They know not what they do.

THE IMPENITENT THIEF.
                   If thou be Christ,
Oh save thyself and us!

THE PENITENT THIEF.
                       Remember me,
Lord, when thou comest into thine own kingdom.

CHRISTUS.
This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.

MANAHEN.
Golgotha! Golgotha!  Oh the pain and darkness!
Oh the uplifted cross, that shall forever
Shine through the darkness, and shall conquer pain
By the triumphant memory of this hour!

SIMON MAGUS.
O Nazarene!  I find thee here at last!
Thou art no more a phantom unto me!
This is the end of one who called himself
The Son of God!  Such is the fate of those
Who preach new doctrines.  'T is not what he did,
But what he said, hath brought him unto this.
I will speak evil of no dignitaries.
This is my hour of triumph, Nazarene!

THE YOUNG RULER.
This is the end of him who said to me:
Sell that thou hast, and give unto the poor!
This is the treasure in heaven he promised me!

CHRISTUS.
Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani!

A SOLDIER, preparing the hyssop.
He calleth for Elias!

ANOTHER.
                     Nay, let be!
See if Elias will now come to save him!

CHRISTUS.
I thirst.

A SOLDIER.
       Give him the wormwood!

CHRISTUS, with a loud cry, bowing his head.
                         It is finished!


XI

THE TWO MARIES

MARY MAGDALENE.
We have risen early, yet the sun
O'ertakes us ere we reach the sepulchre,
To wrap the body of our blessed Lord
With our sweet spices.

MARY, MOTHER OF JAMES.
                  Lo, this is the garden,
And yonder is the sepulchre.  But who
Shall roll away the stone for us to enter?

MARY MAGDALENE.
It hath been rolled away!  The sepulchre
Is open!  Ah, who hath been here before us,
When we rose early, wishing to be first?

MARY, MOTHER OF JAMES.
I am affrighted!

MARY MAGDALENE.
                 Hush! I will stoop down
And look within.  There is a young man sitting
On the right side, clothed in a long white garment!
It is an angel!

THE ANGEL.
               Fear not; ye are seeking
Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified.
Why do ye seek the living among the dead?
He is no longer here; He is arisen!
Come see the place where the Lord lay!  Remember
How He spake unto you in Galilee,
Saying: The Son of Man must be delivered
Into the hands of sinful men; by them
Be crucified, and the third day rise again!
But go your way, and say to his disciples,
He goeth before you into Galilee;
There shall ye see Him as He said to you.

MARY, MOTHER OF JAMES.
I will go swiftly for them.

MARY MAGDALENE, alone, weeping.
                       They have taken
My Lord away from me, and now I know not
Where they have laid Him!  Who is there to tell me?
This is the gardener.  Surely he must know.

CHRISTUS.
Woman, why weepest thou?  Whom seekest thou?

MARY MAGDALENE.
They have taken my Lord away; I cannot find Him.
O sir, if thou have borne Him hence, I pray thee
Tell me where thou hast laid Him.

CHRISTUS.
                              Mary!

MARY MAGDALENE.
                                 Rabboni!



XII

THE SEA OF GALILEE

NATHANIEL, in the ship.
All is now ended.

JOHN.
                   Nay, He is arisen,
I ran unto the tomb, and stooping down
Looked in, and saw the linen grave-clothes lying,
Yet dared not enter.

PETER.
                     I went in, and saw
The napkin that had been about his head,
Not lying with the other linen clothes,
But wrapped together in a separate place.

THOMAS.
And I have seen Him.  I have seen the print
Of nails upon his hands, and thrust my hands
Into his side.  I know He is arisen;
But where are now the kingdom and the glory
He promised unto us?  We have all dreamed
That we were princes, and we wake to find
We are but fishermen.

PETER.
                 Who should have been
Fishers of men!

JOHN.
            We have come back again
To the old life, the peaceful life, among
The white towns of the Galilean lake.

PETER.
They seem to me like silent sepulchres
In the gray light of morning!  The old life,
Yea, the old life! for we have toiled all night
And have caught nothing.

JOHN.
                      Do ye see a man
Standing upon the beach and beckoning?
'T is like an apparition.  He hath kindled
A fire of coals, and seems to wait for us.
He calleth.

CHRISTUS, from the shore.
          Children, have ye any meat?

PETER.
Alas! We have caught nothing.

CHRISTUS.
                        Cast the net
On the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.

PETER.
How that reminds me of the days gone by,
And one who said: Launch out into the deep,
And cast your nets!

NATHANAEL.
            We have but let them down
And they are filled, so that we cannot draw them!

JOHN.
It is the Lord!

PETER, girding his fisher's coat about him.
              He said: When I am risen
I will go before you into Galilee!

He casts himself into the lake.

JOHN.
There is no fear in love; for perfect love
Casteth out fear.  Now then, if ye are men,
Put forth your strength; we are not far from shore;
The net is heavy, but breaks not.  All is safe.

PETER, on the shore.
Dear Lord! I heard thy voice and could not wait.
Let me behold thy face, and kiss thy feet!
Thou art not dead, thou livest!  Again I see thee.
Pardon, dear Lord!  I am a sinful man;
I have denied thee thrice.  Have mercy on me!

THE OTHERS, coming to land.
Dear Lord! stay with us! cheer us! comfort us!
Lo! we again have found thee!  Leave us not!

CHRISTUS.
Bring hither of the fish that ye have caught,
And come and eat!

JOHN.
         Behold!  He breaketh bread
As He was wont.  From his own blessed hands
Again we take it.

CHRISTUS.
                  Simon, son of Jonas,
Lovest thou me, more than these others?

PETER.
                                   Yea,
More, Lord, than all men, even more than these.
Thou knowest that I love thee.

CHRISTUS.
                      Feed my lambs.

THOMAS, aside.
How more than we do?  He remaineth ever
Self-confident and boastful as before.
Nothing will cure him.

CHRISTUS.
                   Simon, son of Jonas,
Lovest thou me?

PETER.
        Yea, dearest Lord, I love thee.
Thou knowest that I love thee.

CHRISTUS.
                       Feed my sheep.

THOMAS, aside.
Again, the selfsame question, and the answer
Repeated with more vehemence.  Can the Master
Doubt if we love Him?

CHRISTUS.
                  Simon, son of Jonas,
Lovest thou me?

PETER, grieved.
   Dear Lord, thou knowest all things.
Thou knowest that I love thee.

CHRISTUS.
                       Feed my sheep.
When thou wast young thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst
Whither thou wouldst; but when thou shalt be old,
Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and other men
Shall gird and carry thee whither thou wouldst not.
Follow thou me!

JOHN, aside.
                It is a prophecy
Of what death he shall die.

PETER, pointing to JOHN.
                      Tell me, O Lord,
And what shall this man do?

CHRISTUS.
                        And if I will
He tarry till I come, what is it to thee?
Follow thou me!

PETER.
Yea, I will follow thee, dear Lord and Master!
Will follow thee through fasting and temptation,
Through all thine agony and bloody sweat,
Thy cross and passion, even unto death!



EPILOGUE

SYMBOLUM APOSTOLORUM

PETER.
I believe in God the Father Almighty;

JOHN.
Maker of heaven and Earth;

JAMES.
And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord;

ANDREW.
Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary;

PHILIP.
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried;

THOMAS.
And the third day He rose again from the dead;

BARTHOLOMEW.
He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God,
the Father Almighty;

MATTHEW.
From thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

JAMES, THE SON OF ALFHEUS.
I believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church;

SIMON ZELOTES.
The communion of Saints; the forgiveness of sins;

JUDE.
The resurrection of the body;

MATTHIAS.
And the Life Everlasting.



FIRST INTERLUDE

THE ABBOT JOACHIM

A ROOM IN THE CONVENT OF FLORA IN CALABRIA.  NIGHT.

JOACHIM.
The wind is rising; it seizes and shakes
The doors and window-blinds and makes
Mysterious moanings in the halls;
The convent-chimneys seem almost
The trumpets of some heavenly host,
Setting its watch upon our walls!
Where it listeth, there it bloweth;
We hear the sound, but no man knoweth
Whence it cometh or whither it goeth,
And thus it is with the Holy Ghost.
O breath of God!  O my delight
In many a vigil of the night,
Like the great voice in Patmos heard
By John, the Evangelist of the Word,
I hear thee behind me saying: Write
In a book the things that thou hast seen,
The things that are, and that have been,
And the things that shall hereafter be!

This convent, on the rocky crest
Of the Calabrian hills, to me
A Patmos is wherein I rest;
While round about me like a sea
The white mists roll, and overflow
The world that lies unseen below
In darkness and in mystery.
Here in the Spirit, in the vast
Embrace of God's encircling arm,
Am I uplifted from all harm
The world seems something far away,
Something belonging to the Past,
A hostelry, a peasant's farm,
That lodged me for a night or day,
In which I care not to remain,
Nor, having left, to see again.

Thus, in the hollow of Gods hand
I dwelt on sacred Tabor's height,
When as a simple acolyte
I journeyed to the Holy Land,
A pilgrim for my master's sake,
And saw the Galilean Lake,
And walked through many a village street
That once had echoed to his feet.
There first I heard the great command,
The voice behind me saying: Write!
And suddenly my soul became
Illumined by a flash of flame,
That left imprinted on my thought
The image I in vain had sought,
And which forever shall remain;
As sometimes from these windows high,
Gazing at midnight on the sky
Black with a storm of wind and rain,
I have beheld a sudden glare
Of lightning lay the landscape bare,
With tower and town and hill and plain
Distinct and burnt into my brain,
Never to be effaced again!

And I have written.  These volumes three,
The Apocalypse, the Harmony
Of the Sacred Scriptures, new and old,
And the Psalter with Ten Strings, enfold
Within their pages, all and each,
The Eternal Gospel that I teach.
Well I remember the Kingdom of Heaven
Hath been likened to a little leaven
Hidden in two measures of meal,
Until it leavened the whole mass;
So likewise will it come to pass
With the doctrines that I here conceal.

Open and manifest to me
The truth appears, and must be told;
All sacred mysteries are threefold;
Three Persons in the Trinity,
Three ages of Humanity,
And holy Scriptures likewise three,
Of Fear, of Wisdom, and of Love;
For Wisdom that begins in Fear
Endeth in Love; the atmosphere
In which the soul delights to be
And finds that perfect liberty
Which cometh only from above.

In the first Age, the early prime
And dawn of all historic time,
The Father reigned; and face to face
He spake with the primeval race.
Bright Angels, on his errands sent,
Sat with the patriarch in his tent;
His prophets thundered in the street;
His lightnings flashed, his hailstorms beat;
In earthquake and in flood and flame,
In tempest and in cloud He came!
The fear of God is in his Book;
The pages of the Pentateuch
Are full of the terror of his name.

Then reigned the Son; his Covenant
Was peace on earth, good-will to man;
With Him the reign of Law began.
He was the Wisdom and the Word,
And sent his Angels Ministrant,
Unterrified and undeterred,
To rescue souls forlorn and lost,
The troubled, tempted, tempest-tost
To heal, to comfort, and to teach.
The fiery tongues of Pentecost
His symbols were, that they should preach
In every form of human speech
From continent to continent.
He is the Light Divine, whose rays
Across the thousand years unspent
Shine through the darkness of our days,
And touch with their celestial fires
Our churches and our convent spires.
His Book is the New Testament.

These Ages now are of the Past;
And the Third Age begins at last.
The coming of the Holy Ghost,
The reign of Grace, the reign of Love
Brightens the mountain-tops above,
And the dark outline of the coast.
Already the whole land is white
With Convent walls, as if by night
A snow had fallen on hill and height!
Already from the streets and marts
Of town and traffic, and low cares,
Men climb the consecrated stairs
With weary feet, and bleeding hearts;
And leave the world and its delights,
Its passions, struggles, and despairs,
For contemplation and for prayers
In cloister-cells of coenobites.

Eternal benedictions rest
Upon thy name, Saint Benedict!
Founder of convents in the West,
Who built on Mount Cassino's crest
In the Land of Labor, thine eagle's nest!
May I be found not derelict
In aught of faith or godly fear,
If I have written, in many a page,
The Gospel of the coming age,
The Eternal Gospel men shall hear.
Oh may I live resembling thee,
And die at last as thou hast died;
So that hereafter men may see,
Within the choir, a form of air,
Standing with arms outstretched in prayer,
As one that hath been crucified!
My work is finished; I am strong
In faith and hope and charity;
For I have written the things I see,
The things that have been and shall be,
Conscious of right, nor fearing wrong;
Because I am in love with Love,
And the sole thing I hate is Hate;
For Hate is death; and Love is life,
A peace, a splendor from above;
And Hate, a never-ending strife,
A smoke, a blackness from the abyss
Where unclean serpents coil and hiss!
Love is the Holy Ghost within
Hate the unpardonable sin!
Who preaches otherwise than this
Betrays his Master with a kiss!



PART TWO

THE GOLDEN LEGEND

PROLOGUE

THE SPIRE OF STRASBURG CATHEDRAL

Night and storm.  LUCIFER, with the Powers of the Air, trying to
tear down the Cross.

LUCIFER.
Hasten! hasten!
O ye spirits!
From its station drag the ponderous
Cross of iron, that to mock us
Is uplifted high in air!

VOICES.
Oh, we cannot!
For around it
All the Saints and Guardian Angels
Throng in legions to protect it;
They defeat us everywhere!

THE BELLS.
     Laudo Deum verum!
     Plebem voco!
     Congrego clerum!

LUCIFER.
Lower! lower!
Hover downward!
Seize the loud, vociferous bells, and
Clashing, clanging to the pavement,
Hurl them from their windy tower.

VOICES.
All thy thunders
Here are harmless!
For these bells have been anointed,
And baptized with holy water!
They defy our utmost power.

THE BELLS.
     Defunctos ploro!
     Pestem fugo!
     Festa decoro!

LUCIFER.
Shake the casements!
Break the painted
Panes, that flame with gold and crimson;
Scatter them like leaves of Autumn,
Swept away before the blast!

VOICES.
Oh, we cannot!
The Archangel
Michael flames from every window,
With the sword of fire that drove us
Headlong, out of heaven, aghast!

THE BELLS.
     Funera plango!
     Fulgura frango!
     Sabbata pango!

LUCIFER.
Aim your lightnings
At the oaken,
Massive, iron-studded portals!
Sack the house of God, and scatter
Wide the ashes of the dead!

VOICES.
Oh, we cannot!
The Apostles
And the Martyrs, wrapped in mantles,
Stand as warders at the entrance,
Stand as sentinels o'erhead!

THE BELLS.
     Excito lentos!
     Dissipo ventos!
     Paco cruentos!

LUCIFER.
Baffled! baffled!
Inefficient,
Craven spirits! leave this labor
Unto time, the great Destroyer!
Come away, ere night is gone!

VOICES.
Onward! onward!
With the night-wind,
Over field and farm and forest,
Lonely homestead, darksome hamlet,
Blighting all we breathe upon!

They sweep away. Organ and Gregorian Chant.

CHOIR.
Nocte surgentes
Vigilemus omnes!


I

THE CASTLE OF VAUTSBERG ON THE RHINE

A chamber in a tower.  PRINCE HENRY sitting alone, ill and
restless.
Midnight.

PRINCE HENRY.
I cannot sleep! my fervid brain
Calls up the vanished Past again,
And throws its misty splendors deep
Into the pallid realms of sleep!
A breath from that far-distant shore
Comes freshening ever more and more,
And wafts o'er intervening seas
Sweet odors from the Hesperides!
A wind, that through the corridor
Just stirs the curtain, and no more,
And, touching the aolian strings,
Faints with the burden that it brings!
Come back! ye friendships long departed!
That like o'erflowing streamlets started,
And now are dwindled, one by one,
To stony channels in the sun!
Come back! ye friends, whose lives are ended,
Come back, with all that light attended,
Which seemed to darken and decay
When ye arose and went away!

They come, the shapes of joy and woe,
The airy crowds of long ago,
The dreams and fancies known of yore,
That have been, and shall be no more.
They change the cloisters of the night
Into a garden of delight;
They make the dark and dreary hours
Open and blossom into flowers!
I would not sleep!  I love to be
Again in their fair company;
But ere my lips can bid them stay,
They pass and vanish quite away!
Alas! our memories may retrace
Each circumstance of time and place,
Season and scene come back again,
And outward things unchanged remain;
The rest we cannot reinstate;
Ourselves we can not re-create;
Nor set our souls to the same key
Of the remembered harmony!

Rest! rest!  Oh, give me rest and peace!
The thought of life that ne'er shall cease
Has something in it like despair,
A weight I am too weak to bear!
Sweeter to this afflicted breast
The thought of never-ending rest!
Sweeter the undisturbed and deep
Tranquillity of endless sleep!

A flash of lightning, out of which LUCIFER appears, in the garb
of a travelling Physician.

LUCIFER.
All hail, Prince Henry!

PRINCE HENRY, starting.
                      Who is it speaks?
Who and what are you?

LUCIFER.
                     One who seeks
A moment's audience with the Prince.

PRINCE HENRY.
When came you in?

LUCIFER.
                 A moment since.
I found your study door unlocked,
And thought you answered when I knocked.

PRINCE HENRY.
I did not hear you.

LUCIFER.
               You heard the thunder;
It was loud enough to waken the dead.
And it is not a matter of special wonder
That, when God is walking overhead,
You should not hear my feeble tread.

PRINCE HENRY.
What may your wish or purpose be?

LUCIFER.
Nothing or everything, as it pleases
Your Highness.  You behold in me
Only a travelling Physician;
One of the few who have a mission
To cure incurable diseases,
Or those that are called so.

PRINCE HENRY.
                          Can you bring
The dead to life?

LUCIFER.
                 Yes; very nearly.
And, what is a wiser and better thing,
Can keep the living from ever needing
Such an unnatural, strange proceeding,
By showing conclusively and clearly
That death is a stupid blunder merely,
And not a necessity of our lives.
My being here is accidental;
The storm, that against your casement drives,
In the little village below waylaid me.
And there I heard, with a secret delight,
Of your maladies physical and mental,
Which neither astonished nor dismayed me.
And I hastened hither, though late in the night,
To proffer my aid!

PRINCE HENRY, ironically.
                   For this you came!
Ah, how can I ever hope to requite
This honor from one so erudite?

LUCIFER.
The honor is mine, or will be when
I have cured your disease.

PRINCE HENRY.
                    But not till then.

LUCIFER.
What is your illness?

PRINCE HENRY.
                     It has no name.
A smouldering, dull, perpetual flame,
As in a kiln, burns in my veins,
Sending up vapors to the head;
My heart has become a dull lagoon,
Which a kind of leprosy drinks and drains;
I am accounted as one who is dead,
And, indeed, I think that I shall be soon.

LUCIFER.
And has Gordonius the Divine,
In his famous Lily of Medicine,--
I see the book lies open before you,--
No remedy potent enough to restore you?

PRINCE HENRY.
None whatever!

LUCIFER.
               The dead are dead,
And their oracles dumb, when questioned
Of the new diseases that human life
Evolves in its progress, rank and rife.
Consult the dead upon things that were,
But the living only on things that are.
Have you done this, by the appliance
And aid of doctors?

PRINCE HENRY.
                   Ay, whole schools
Of doctors, with their learned rules;
But the case is quite beyond their science.
Even the doctors of Salern
Send me back word they can discern
No cure for a malady like this,
Save one which in its nature is
Impossible and cannot be!

LUCIFER.
That sounds oracular!

PRINCE HENRY.
                      Unendurable!

LUCIFER.
What is their remedy?

PRINCE HENRY.
                      You shall see;
Writ in this scroll is the mystery.

LUCIFER, reading.
"Not to be cured, yet not incurable!
The only remedy that remains
Is the blood that flows from a maiden's veins,
Who of her own free will shall die,
And give her life as the price of yours!"

That is the strangest of all cures,
And one, I think, you will never try;
The prescription you may well put by,
As something impossible to find
Before the world itself shall end!
And yet who knows?  One cannot say
That into some maiden's brain that kind
Of madness will not find its way.
Meanwhile permit me to recommend,
As the matter admits of no delay,
My wonderful Catholicon,
Of very subtile and magical powers!

PRINCE HENRY.
Purge with your nostrums and drugs infernal
The spouts and gargoyles of these towers,
Not me!  My faith is utterly gone
In every power but the Power Supernal!
Pray tell ne, of what school are you?

LUCIFER.
Both of the Old and of the New!
The school of Hermes Trismegistus,
Who uttered his oracles sublime
Before the Olympiads, in the dew
Of the early dusk and dawn of time,
The reign of dateless old Hephaestus!
As northward, from its Nubian springs,
The Nile, forever new and old,
Among the living and the dead,
Its mighty mystic stream has rolled;
So, starting from its fountain-head
Under the lotus-leaves of Isis,
From the dead demigods of eld,
Through long unbroken lines of kings
Its course the sacred art has held,
Unchecked, unchanged by man's devices.
This art the Arabian Geber taught,
And in alembics, finely wrought,
Distilling herbs and flowers, discovered
The secret that so long had hovered
Upon the misty verge of Truth,
The Elixir of Perpetual Youth,
Called Alcohol, in the Arab speech!
Like him, this wondrous lore I teach!

PRINCE HENRY.
What! an adept?

LUCIFFR.
              Nor less, nor more!

PRINCE HENRY.
I am a reader of your books,
A lover of that mystic lore!
With such a piercing glance it looks
Into great Nature's open eye,
And sees within it trembling lie
The portrait of the Deity!
And yet, alas! with all my pains,
The secret and the mystery
Have baffled and eluded me,
Unseen the grand result remains!

LUCIFER, showing a flask.
Behold it here! this little flask
Contains the wonderful quintessence,
The perfect flower and efflorescence,
Of all the knowledge man can ask!
Hold it up thus against the light!

PRINCE HENRY.
How limpid, pure, and crystalline,
How quick, and tremulous, and bright
The little wavelets dance and shine,
As were it the Water of Life in sooth!

LUCIFER.
It is!  It assuages every pain,
Cures all disease, and gives again
To age the swift delights of youth.
Inhale its fragrance.

PRINCE HENRY.
                     It is sweet.
A thousand different odors meet
And mingle in its rare perfume,
Such as the winds of summer waft
At open windows through a room!

LUCIFER.
Will you not taste it?

PRINCE HENRY.
                      Will one draught
Suffice?

LUCIFER.
        If not, you can drink more.

PRINCE HENRY.
Into this crystal goblet pour
So much as safely I may drink,

LUCIFER, pouring.
Let not the quantity alarm you;
You may drink all; it will not harm you.

PRINCE HENRY.
I am as one who on the brink
Of a dark river stands and sees
The waters flow, the landscape dim
Around him waver, wheel, and swim,
And, ere he plunges, stops to think
Into what whirlpools he may sink;
One moment pauses, and no more,
Then madly plunges from the shore!
Headlong into the mysteries
Of life and death I boldly leap,
Nor fear the fateful current's sweep,
Nor what in ambush lurks below!
For death is better than disease!

An ANGEL with an aeolian harp hovers in the air.

ANGEL.
Woe! woe! eternal woe!
Not only the whispered prayer
Of love,
But the imprecations of hate,
Reverberate
For ever and ever through the air
Above!
This fearful curse
Shakes the great universe!

LUCIFER, disappearing.
Drink! drink!
And thy soul shall sink
Down into the dark abyss,
Into the infinite abyss,
From which no plummet nor rope
Ever drew up the silver sand of hope!

PRINCE HENRY, drinking.
It is like a draught of fire!
Through every vein
I feel again
The fever of youth, the soft desire;
A rapture that is almost pain
Throbs in my heart and fills my brain
O joy! O joy!  I feel
The band of steel
That so long and heavily has pressed
Upon my breast
Uplifted, and the malediction
Of my affliction
Is taken from me, and my weary breast
At length finds rest.

THE ANGEL.
It is but the rest of the fire, from which the air has been
taken!
It is but the rest of the sand, when the hour-glass is not
shaken!
It is but the rest of the tide between the ebb and the flow!
It is but the rest of the wind between the flaws that blow!
With fiendish laughter,
Hereafter,
This false physician
Will mock thee in thy perdition.

PRINCE HENRY.
Speak! speak!
Who says that I am ill?
I am not ill!  I am not weak!
The trance, the swoon, the dream, is o'er!
I feel the chill of death no more!
At length,
I stand renewed in all my strength
Beneath me I can feel
The great earth stagger and reel,
As if the feet of a descending God
Upon its surface trod,
And like a pebble it rolled beneath his heel!
This, O brave physician! this
Is thy great Palingenesis!

Drinks again.

THE ANGEL.
Touch the goblet no more!
It will make thy heart sore
To its very core!
Its perfume is the breath
Of the Angel of Death,
And the light that within it lies
Is the flash of his evil eyes.
Beware!  Oh, beware!
For sickness, sorrow, and care
All are there!

PRINCE HENRY, sinking back.
O thou voice within my breast!
Why entreat me, why upbraid me,
When the steadfast tongues of truth
And the flattering hopes of youth
Have all deceived me and betrayed me?
Give me, give me rest, oh rest!
Golden visions wave and hover,
Golden vapors, waters streaming,
Landscapes moving, changing, gleaming!
I am like a happy lover,
Who illumines life with dreaming!
Brave physician!  Rare physician!
Well hast thou fulfilled thy mission!

His head falls on his book.

THE ANGEL, receding.
Alas! alas!
Like a vapor the golden vision
Shall fade and pass,
And thou wilt find in thy heart again
Only the blight of pain,
And bitter, bitter, bitter contrition!


COURT-YARD OF THE CASTLE

HUBERT standing by the gateway.

HUBERT.
How sad the grand old castle looks!
O'erhead, the unmolested rooks
Upon the turret's windy top
Sit, talking of the farmer's crop
Here in the court-yard springs the grass,
So few are now the feet that pass;
The stately peacocks, bolder grown,
Come hopping down the steps of stone,
As if the castle were their own;
And I, the poor old seneschal,
Haunt, like a ghost, the banquet-hall.
Alas! the merry guests no more
Crowd through the hospitable door;
No eyes with youth and passion shine,
No cheeks glow redder than the wine;
No song, no laugh, no jovial din
Of drinking wassail to the pin;
But all is silent, sad, and drear,
And now the only sounds I hear
Are the hoarse rooks upon the walls,
And horses stamping in their stalls!

A horn sounds.

What ho! that merry, sudden blast
Reminds me of the days long past!
And, as of old resounding, grate
The heavy hinges of the gate,
And, clattering loud, with iron clank,
Down goes the sounding bridge of plank,
As if it were in haste to greet
The pressure of a traveller's feet!

Enter WALTER the Minnesinger.

WALTER.
How now, my friend!  This looks quite lonely!
No banner flying from the walls,
No pages and no seneschals,
No warders, and one porter only!
Is it you, Hubert?

HUBERT.
                  Ah! Master Walter!

WALTER.
Alas! how forms and faces alter!
I did not know you.  You look older!
Your hair has grown much grayer and thinner,
And you stoop a little in the shoulder!

HUBERT.
Alack!  I am a poor old sinner,
And, like these towers, begin to moulder;
And you have been absent many a year!

WALTER.
How is the Prince?

HUBERT.
                  He is not here;
He has been ill: and now has fled.

WALTER.
Speak it out frankly: say he's dead!
Is it not so?

HUBERT.
              No; if you please,
A strange, mysterious disease
Fell on him with a sudden blight.
Whole hours together he would stand
Upon the terrace in a dream,
Resting his head upon his hand,
Best pleased when he was most alone,
Like Saint John Nepomuck in stone,
Looking down into a stream.
In the Round Tower, night after night,
He sat and bleared his eyes with books;
Until one morning we found him there
Stretched on the floor, as if in a swoon
He had fallen from his chair.
We hardly recognized his sweet looks!

WALTER.
Poor Prince!

HUBERT.
       I think he might have mended;
And he did mend; but very soon
The priests came flocking in, like rooks,
With all their crosiers and their crooks,
And so at last the matter ended.

WALTER.
How did it end?

HUBERT.
                Why, in Saint Rochus
They made him stand and wait his doom;
And, as if he were condemned to the tomb,
Began to mutter their hocus-pocus.
First, the Mass for the Dead they chanted,
Then three times laid upon his head
A shovelful of churchyard clay,
Saying to him, as he stood undaunted,
"This is a sign that thou art dead,
So in thy heart be penitent!"
And forth from the chapel door he   went
Into disgrace and banishment,
Clothed in a cloak of hodden gray,
And hearing a wallet, and a bell,
Whose sound should be a perpetual knell
To keep all travellers away.

WALTER.
Oh, horrible fate!  Outcast, rejected,
As one with pestilence infected!

HUBERT.
Then was the family tomb unsealed,
And broken helmet, sword, and shield
Buried together, in common wreck,
As is the custom when the last
Of any princely house has passed,
And thrice, as with a trumpet-blast,
A herald shouted down the stair
The words of warning and despair,--
"O Hoheneck!  O Hoheneck!"

WALTER.
Still in my soul that cry goes on,--
Forever gone! forever gone!
Ah, what a cruel sense of loss,
Like a black shadow, would fall across
The hearts of all, if he should die!
His gracious presence upon earth
Was as a fire upon a hearth;
As pleasant songs, at morning sung,
The words that dropped from his sweet tongue
Strengthened our hearts; or heard at night
Made all our slumbers soft and light.
Where is he?

HUBERT.
             In the Odenwald.
Some of his tenants, unappalled
By fear of death, or priestly word,--
A holy family, that make
Each meal a Supper of the Lord,--
Have him beneath their watch and ward,
For love of him, and Jesus' sake!
Pray you come in.  For why should I
With out-door hospitality
My prince's friend thus entertain?

WALTER.
I would a moment here remain.
But you, good Hubert, go before,
Fill me a goblet of May-drink,
As aromatic as the May
From which it steals the breath away,
And which he loved so well of yore;
It is of him that I would think.
You shall attend me, when I call,
In the ancestral banquet-hall.
Unseen companions, guests of air,
You cannot wait on, will be there;
They taste not food, they drink not wine,
But their soft eyes look into mine,
And their lips speak to me, and all
The vast and shadowy banquet-hall
Is full of looks and words divine!

Leaning over the parapet.

The day is done; and slowly from the scene
The stooping sun up-gathers his spent shafts,
And puts them back into his golden quiver!
Below me in the valley, deep and green
As goblets are, from which in thirsty draughts
We drink its wine, the swift and mantling river
Flows on triumphant through these lovely regions,
Etched with the shadows of its sombre margent,
And soft, reflected clouds of gold and argent!
Yes, there it flows, forever, broad and still
As when the vanguard of the Roman legions
First saw it from the top of yonder hill!
How beautiful it is!  Fresh fields of wheat,
Vineyard and town, and tower with fluttering flag,
The consecrated chapel on the crag,
And the white hamlet gathered round its base,
Like Mary sitting at her Saviour's feet,
And looking up at his beloved face!
O friend!  O best of friends!  Thy absence more
Than the impending night darkens the landscape o'er!


II

A FARM IN THE ODENWALD

A garden; morning; PRINCE HENRY seated, with a book.
ELSIE at a distance gathering flowers.

PRINCE HENRY, reading.
One morning, all alone,
Out of his convent of gray stone,
Into the forest older, darker, grayer,
His lips moving, as if in prayer,
His head sunken upon his breast
As in a dream of rest,
Walked the Monk Felix.  All about
The broad, sweet sunshine lay without,
Filling the summer air;
And within the woodlands as he trod,
The dusk was like the truce of God
With worldly woe and care;
Under him lay the golden moss;
And above him the boughs of hoary trees
Waved, and made the sign of the cross,
And whispered their Benedicites;
And from the ground
Rose an odor sweet and fragrant
Of the wild-flowers and the vagrant
Vines that wandered,
Seeking the sunshine, round and round.

These he heeded not, but pondered
On the volume in his hand,
Wherein amazed he read:
"A thousand years in thy sight
Are but as yesterday when it is past,
And as a watch in the night!"
And with his eyes downcast
In humility he said:
"I believe, O Lord,
What is written in thy Word,
But alas! I do not understand!"

And lo! he heard
The sudden singing of a bird,
A snow-white bird, that from a cloud
Dropped down,
And among the branches brown
Sat singing,
So sweet, and clear, and loud,
It seemed a thousand harp-strings ringing.
And the Monk Felix closed his book,
And long, long,
With rapturous look,
He listened to the song,
And hardly breathed or stirred,
Until he saw, as in a vision,
The land Elysian,
And in the heavenly city heard
Angelic feet
Fall on the golden flagging of the street
And he would fain
Have caught the wondrous bird,
But strove in vain;
For it flew away, away,
Far over hill and dell,
And instead of its sweet singing
He heard the convent bell
Suddenly in the silence ringing
For the service of noonday.
And he retraced
His pathway sadly and in haste.

In the convent there was a change!
He looked for each well-known face,
But the faces were new and strange;
New figures sat in the oaken stalls,
New voices chanted in the choir;
Yet the place was the same place,
The same dusky walls
Of cold, gray stone,
The same cloisters and belfry and spire.

A stranger and alone
Among that brotherhood
The Monk Felix stood.
"Forty years," said a Friar,
"Have I been Prior
Of this convent in the wood,
But for that space
Never have I beheld thy face!"

The heart of the Monk Felix fell
And he answered, with submissive tone,
This morning after the hour of Prime,
I left my cell,
And wandered forth alone,
Listening all the time
To the melodious singing
Of a beautiful white bird,
Until I heard
The bells of the convent ringing
Noon from their noisy towers.
It was as if I dreamed;
For what to me had seemed
Moments only, had been hours!"

"Years!" said a voice close by.
It was an aged monk who spoke,
From a bench of oak
Fastened against the wall;--
He was the oldest monk of all.
For a whole century
Had he been there,
Serving God in prayer,
The meekest and humblest of his creatures.
He remembered well the features
Of Felix, and he said,
Speaking distinct and slow:
"One hundred years ago,
When I was a novice in this place,
There was here a monk, full of God's grace,
Who bore the name
Of Felix, and this man must be the same."

And straightway
They brought forth to the light of day
A volume old and brown,
A huge tome, bound
In brass and wild-boar's hide,
Wherein were written down
The names of all who had died
In the convent, since it was edified.
And there they found,
Just as the old monk said,
That on a certain day and date,
One hundred years before,
Had gone forth from the convent gate
The Monk Felix, and never more
Had entered that sacred door.
He had been counted among the dead!
And they knew, at last,
That, such had been the power
Of that celestial and immortal song,
A hundred years had passed,
And had not seemed so long
As a single hour!

ELSIE comes in with flowers.

ELSIE.
Here are flowers for you,
But they are not all for you.
Some of them are for the Virgin
And for Saint Cecilia.

PRINCE HENRY.
As thou standest there,
Thou seemest to me like the angel
That brought the immortal roses
To Saint Cecilia's bridal chamber.

ELSIE.
But these will fade.

PRINCE HENRY.
Themselves will fade,
But not their memory,
And memory has the power
To re-create them from the dust.
They remind me, too,
Of martyred Dorothea,
Who from Celestial gardens sent
Flowers as her witnesses
To him who scoffed and doubted.

ELSIE.
Do you know the story
Of Christ and the Sultan's daughter!
That is the prettiest legend of them all.

PRINCE HENRY.
Then tell it to me.
But first come hither.
Lay the flowers down beside me,
And put both thy hands in mine.
Now tell me the story.

ELSIE.
Early in the morning
The Sultan's daughter
Walked in her father's garden,
Gathering the bright flowers,
All full of dew.

PRINCE HENRY.
Just as thou hast been doing
This morning, dearest Elsie.

ELSIE.
And as she gathered them
She wondered more and more
Who was the Master of the Flowers,
And made them grow
Out of the cold, dark earth.
"In my heart," she said,
"I love him; and for him
Would leave my father's palace,
To labor in his garden."

PRINCE HENRY.
Dear, innocent child!
How sweetly thou recallest
The long-forgotten legend.
That in my early childhood
My mother told me!
Upon my brain
It reappears once more,
As a birth-mark on the forehead
When a hand suddenly
Is raised upon it, and removed!

ELSIE.
And at midnight,
As she lay upon her bed,
She heard a voice
Call to her from the garden,
And, looking forth from her window,
She saw a beautiful youth
Standing among the flowers.
It was the Lord Jesus;
And she went down to Him,
And opened the door for Him;
And He said to her, "O maiden!
Thou hast thought of me with love,
And for thy sake
Out of my Father's kingdom
Have I come hither:
I am the Master of the Flowers.
My garden is in Paradise,
And if thou wilt go with me,
Thy bridal garland
Shall be of bright red flowers."
And then He took from his finger
A golden ring,
And asked the Sultan's daughter
If she would be his bride.
And when she answered Him with love,
His wounds began to bleed,
And she said to Him,
"O Love! how red thy heart is,
And thy hands are full of roses."
"For thy sake," answered He,
"For thy sake is my heart so red,
For thee I bring these roses;
I gathered them at the cross
Whereon I died for thee!
I Come, for my Father calls.
Thou art my elected bride!"
And the Sultan's daughter
Followed Him to his Father's garden.

PRINCE HENRY.
Wouldst thou have done so, Elsie?

ELSIE.
Yes, very gladly.

PRINCE HENRY.
Then the Celestial Bridegroom
Will come for thee also.
Upon thy forehead He will place,
Not his crown of thorns,
But a crown of roses.
In thy bridal chamber,
Like Saint Cecilia,
Thou shalt hear sweet music,
And breathe the fragrance
Of flowers immortal!
Go now and place these flowers
Before her picture.


A ROOM IN THE FARM-HOUSE

Twilight.  URSULA Spinning.  GOTTLIEB asleep in his chair.

URSULA.
Darker and darker!  Hardly a glimmer
Of light comes in at the window-pane;
Or is it my eyes are growing dimmer?
I cannot disentangle this skein,
Nor wind it rightly upon the reel.
Elsie!

GOTTLIER, starting.
The stopping of thy wheel
Has awakened me out of a pleasant dream.
I thought I was sitting beside a stream,
And heard the grinding of a mill,
When suddenly the wheels stood still,
And a voice cried "Elsie," in my ear!
It startled me, it seemed so near.

URSULA.
I was calling her: I want a light.
I cannot see to spin my flax.
Bring the lamp, Elsie.  Dost thou hear?

ELSIE, within.
In a moment!

GOTTLIEB.
         Where are Bertha and Max?

URSULA.
They are sitting with Elsie at the door.
She is telling them stories of the wood,
And the Wolf, and little Red Ridinghood.

GOTTLIEB.
And where is the Prince?

URSULA.
                In his room overhead;
I heard him walking across the floor,
As he always does, with a heavy tread.

ELSIE comes in with a lamp.  MAX and BERTHA follow her; and they
all sing the Evening Song on the lighting of the lamps.


EVENING SONG

O gladsome light
Of the Father Immortal,
And of the celestial
Sacred and blessed
Jesus, our Saviour!

Now to the sunset
Again hast thou brought us;
And seeing the evening
Twilight, we bless thee!
Praise thee, adore thee!

Father omnipotent!
Son, the Life-giver!
Spirit, the Comforter!
Worthy at all times
Of worship and wonder!


PRINCE HENRY, at the door,
Amen!

URSULA.
       Who was it said Amen?

ELSIE.
It was the Prince: he stood at the door,
And listened a moment, as we chanted
The evening song.  He is gone again.
I have often seen him there before.

URSULA.
Poor Prince!

GOTTLIEB.
     I thought the house was haunted!
Poor Prince, alas! and yet as mild
And patient as the gentlest child!

MAX.
I love him because he is so good,
And makes me such fine bows and arrows,
To shoot at the robins and the sparrows,
And the red squirrels in the wood!

BERTHA.
I love him, too!

GOTTLIEB.
                 Ah, yes! we all
Love him from the bottom of our hearts;
He gave us the farm, the house, and the grange,
He gave us the horses and the carts,
And the great oxen in the stall,
The vineyard, and the forest range!
We have nothing to give him but our love!

BERTHA.
Did he give us the beautiful stork above
On the chimney-top, with its large, round nest?

GOTTLIEB.
No, not the stork; by God in heaven,
As a blessing, the dear white stork was given,
But the Prince has given us all the rest.
God bless him, and make him well again.

ELSIE.
Would I could do something for his sake,
Something to cure his sorrow and pain!

GOTTLIEB.
That no one can; neither thou nor I,
Nor any one else.

ELSIE.
                 And must he die?

URSULA.
Yes; if the dear God does not take
Pity upon him in his distress,
And work a miracle!

GOTTLIEB.
                     Or unless
Some maiden, of her own accord,
Offers her life for that of her lord,
And is willing to die in his stead.

ELSIE.
                                  I will!

URSULA.
Prithee, thou foolish child, be still!
Thou shouldst not say what thou dost not mean!

ELSIE.
I mean it truly!

MAX.
O father! this morning,
Down by the mill, in the ravine,
Hans killed a wolf, the very same
That in the night to the sheepfold came,
And ate up my lamb, that was left outside.

GOTTLIEB.
I am glad he is dead.  It will be a warning
To the wolves in the forest, far and wide.

MAX.
And I am going to have his hide!

BERTHA.
I wonder if this is the wolf that ate
Little Red Ridinghood!

URSULA.
                       Oh, no!
That wolf was killed a long while ago.
Come, children, it is growing late.

MAX.
Ah, how I wish I were a man,
As stout as Hans is, and as strong!
I would do nothing else, the whole day long,
But just kill wolves.

GOTTLIEB.
                     Then go to bed,
And grow as fast as a little boy can.
Bertha is half asleep already.
See how she nods her heavy head,
And her sleepy feet are so unsteady
She will hardly be able to creep upstairs.

URSULA.
Goodnight, my children. Here's the light.
And do not forget to say your prayers
Before you sleep.

GOTTLIEB.
                  Good night!

MAX and BERTHA.
                         Good night!

They go out with ELSIE.

URSULA, spinning.
She is a strange and wayward child,
That Elsie of ours.  She looks so old,
And thoughts and fancies weird and wild
Seem of late to have taken hold
Of her heart, that was once so docile and mild!

GOTTLIEB.
She is like all girls.

URSULA.
                      Ah no, forsooth!
Unlike all I have ever seen.
For she has visions and strange dreams,
And in all her words and ways, she seems
Much older than she is in truth.
Who would think her but fifteen?
And there has been of late such a change!
My heart is heavy with fear and doubt
That she may not live till the year is out.
She is so strange,--so strange,--so strange!

GOTTLIEB.
I am not troubled with any such fear;
She will live and thrive for many a year.


ELSIE'S CHAMBER

Night.  ELSIE praying.

ELSIE.
My Redeemer and my Lord,
I beseech thee, I entreat thee,
Guide me in each act and word,
That hereafter I may meet thee,
Watching, waiting, hoping, yearning,
With my lamp well trimmed and burning!

Interceding
With these bleeding
Wounds upon thy hands and side,
For all who have lived and erred
Thou hast suffered, thou hast died,
Scourged, and mocked, and crucified,
And in the grave hast thou been buried!

If my feeble prayer can reach thee,
O my Saviour, I beseech thee,
Even as thou hast died for me,
More sincerely
Let me follow where thou leadest,
Let me, bleeding as thou bleedest,
Die, if dying I may give
Life to one who asks to live,
And more nearly,
Dying thus, resemble thee!


THE CHAMBER OF GOTTLIEB AND URSULA

Midnight. ELSIE standing by their bedside, weeping.

GOTTLIEB.
The wind is roaring; the rushing rain
Is loud upon roof and window-pane,
As if the Wild Huntsman of Rodenstein,
Boding evil to me and mine,
Were abroad to-night with his ghostly train!
In the brief lulls of the tempest wild,
The dogs howl in the yard; and hark!
Some one is sobbing in the dark,
Here in the chamber!

ELSIE.
                     It is I.

URSULA.
Elsie! what ails thee, my poor child?

ELSIE.
I am disturbed and much distressed,
In thinking our dear Prince must die;
I cannot close mine eyes, nor rest,

GOTTLIEB.
What wouldst thou?  In the Power Divine
His healing lies, not in our own;
It is in the hand of God alone,

ELSIE.
Nay, He has put it into mine,
And into my heart!

GOTTLIEB.
                 Thy words are wild!

URSULA.
What dost thou mean? my child! My child!

ELSIE.
That for our dear Prince Henry's sake
I will myself the offering make,
And give my life to purchase his.

URSULA.
Am I still dreaming, or awake?
Thou speakest carelessly of death,
And yet thou knowest not what it is.

ELSIE.
'T is the cessation of our breath.
Silent and motionless we lie;
And no one knoweth more than this.
I saw our little Gertrude die;
She left off breathing, and no more
I smoothed the pillow beneath her head.
She was more beautiful than before.
Like violets faded were her eyes;
By this we knew that she was dead.
Through the open window looked the skies
Into the chamber where she lay,
And the wind was like the sound of wings,
As if angels came to bear her away.
Ah! when I saw and felt these things,
I found it difficult to stay;
I longed to die, as she had died,
And go forth with her, side by side.
The Saints are dead, the Martyrs dead
And Mary, and our Lord; and I
Would follow in humility
The way by them illumined!

URSULA.
My child! my child! thou must not die!

ELSIE.
Why should I live?  Do I not know
The life of woman is full of woe?
Toiling on and on and on,
With breaking heart, and tearful eyes,
And silent lips, and in the soul
The secret longings that arise,
Which this world never satisfies!
Some more, some less, but of the whole
Not one quite happy, no, not one!

URSULA.
It is the malediction of Eve!

ELSIE.
In place of it, let me receive
The benediction of Mary, then.

GOTTLIEB.
Ah, woe is me!  Ah, woe is me!
Most wretched am I among men!

URSULA.
Alas! that I should live to see
Thy death, beloved, and to stand
Above thy grave!  Ah, woe the day!

ELSIE.
Thou wilt not see it.  I shall lie
Beneath the flowers of another land,
For at Salerno, far away
Over the mountains, over the sea,
It is appointed me to die!
And it will seem no more to thee
Than if at the village on market-day
I should a little longer stay
Than I am wont.

URSULA.
               Even as thou sayest!
And how my heart beats, when thou stayest!
I cannot rest until my sight
Is satisfied with seeing thee,
What, then, if thou wert dead?

GOTTLIEB.
                             Ah me!
Of our old eyes thou art the light!
The joy of our old hearts art thou!
And wilt thou die?

URSULA.
                 Not now! not now!

ELSIE.
Christ died for me, and shall not!
Be willing for my Prince to die?
You both are silent; you cannot speak
This said I at our Saviour's feast
After confession, to the priest,
And even he made no reply.
Does he not warn us all to seek
The happier, better land on high,
Where flowers immortal never wither;
And could he forbid me to go thither?

GOTTLIEB.
In God's own time, my heart's delight!
When He shall call thee, not before!

ELSIE.
I heard Him call.  When Christ ascended
Triumphantly, from star to star,
He left the gates of heaven ajar.
I had a vision in the night,
And saw Him standing at the door
Of his Father's mansion, vast and splendid,
And beckoning to me from afar.
I cannot stay!

GOTTLIEB.
               She speaks almost
As if it were the Holy Ghost
Spake through her lips, and in her stead:
What if this were of God?

URSULA.
                         Ah, then
Gainsay it dare we not.

GOTTLIEB.
                        Amen!
Elsie! the words that thou hast said
Are strange and new for us to hear,
And fill our hears with doubt and fear.
Whether it be a dark temptation
Of the Evil One, or God's inspiration,
We in our blindness cannot say.
We must think upon it, and pray;
For evil and good it both resembles.
If it be of God, his will be done!
May He guard us from the Evil One!
How hot thy hand is! how it trembles!
Go to thy bed, and try to sleep.

URSULA.
Kiss me.  Good night; and do not weep!

ELSIE goes out.

Ah, what an awful thing is this!
I almost shuddered at her kiss,
As if a ghost had touched my cheek,
I am so childish and so weak!
As soon as I see the earliest gray
Of morning glimmer in the east,
I will go over to the priest,
And hear what the good man has to say.


A VILLAGE CHURCH

A woman kneeling at the confessional.

THE PARISH PRIEST, from within.
Go, sin no more!  Thy penance o'er,
A new and better life begin!
God maketh thee forever free
From the dominion of thy sin!
Go, sin no more!  He will restore
The peace that filled thy heart before,
And pardon thine iniquity!

The woman goes out.  The Priest comes forth, and walks
slowly up and down the church.

O blessed Lord! how much I need
Thy light to guide me on my way!
So many hands, that, without heed,
Still touch thy wounds and make them bleed!
So many feet, that, day by day,
Still wander from thy fold astray!
Unless thou fill me with thy light,
I cannot lead thy flock aright;
Nor without thy support can bear
The burden of so great a care,
But am myself a castaway!

A pause.

The day is drawing to its close;
And what good deeds, since first it rose,
Have I presented, Lord, to thee,
As offsprings of my ministry?
What wrong repressed, what right maintained,
What struggle passed, what victory gained,
What good attempted and attained?
Feeble, at best, is my endeavor!
I see, but cannot reach, the height
That lies forever in the light;
And yet forever and forever,
When seeming just within my grasp,
I feel my feeble hands unclasp,
And sink discouraged into night!
For thine own purpose, thou hast sent
The strife and the discouragement!

A pause.

Why stayest thou, Prince of Hoheneck?
Why keep me pacing to and fro
Amid these aisles of sacred gloom,
Counting my footsteps as I go,
And marking with each step a tomb?
Why should the world for thee make room,
And wait thy leisure and thy beck?
Thou comest in the hope to hear
Some word of comfort and of cheer.
What can I say?  I cannot give
The counsel to do this and live;
But rather, firmly to deny
The tempter, though his power be strong,
And, inaccessible to wrong,
Still like a martyr live and die!

A pause.

The evening air grows dusk and brown;
I must go forth into the town,
To visit beds of pain and death,
Of restless limbs, and quivering breath,
And sorrowing hearts, and patient eyes
That see, through tears, the sun go down,
But never more shall see it rise.
The poor in body and estate,
The sick and the disconsolate,
Must not on man's convenience wait.

Goes out.

Enter LUCIFER, as a Priest.

LUCIFER, with a genuflexion, mocking.
This is the Black Pater-noster.
God was my foster,
He fostered me
Under the book of the Palm-tree!
St. Michael was my dame.
He was born at Bethlehem,
He was made of flesh and blood.
God send me my right food,
My right food, and shelter too,
That I may to yon kirk go,
To read upon yon sweet book
Which the mighty God of heaven shook
Open, open, hell's gates!
Shut, shut, heaven's gates!
All the devils in the air
The stronger be, that hear the Black Prayer!

Looking round the church.

What a darksome and dismal place!
I wonder that any man has the face
To call such a hole the House of the Lord,
And the gate of Heaven,--yet such is the word.
Ceiling, and walls, and windows old,
Covered with cobwebs, blackened with mould;
Dust on the pulpit, dust on the stairs,
Dust on the benches, and stalls, and chairs!
The pulpit, from which such ponderous sermons
Have fallen down on the brains of the Germans,
With about as much real edification
As if a great Bible, bound in lead,
Had fallen, and struck them on the head;
And I ought to remember that sensation!
Here stands the holy-water stoup!
Holy-water it may be to many,
But to me, the veriest Liquor Gehennae!
It smells like a filthy fast-day soup!
Near it stands the box for the poor,
With its iron padlock, safe and sure.
I and the priest of the parish know
Whither all these charities go;
Therefore, to keep up the institution,
I will add my little contribution!

He puts in money.

Underneath this mouldering tomb,
With statue of stone, and scutcheon of brass,
Slumbers a great lord of the village.
All his life was riot and pillage,
But at length, to escape the threatened doom
Of the everlasting penal fire,
He died in the dress of a mendicant friar,
And bartered his wealth for a daily mass.
But all that afterwards came to pass,
And whether he finds it dull or pleasant,
Is kept a secret for the present,
At his own particular desire.

And here, in a corner of the wall,
Shadowy, silent, apart from all,
With its awful portal open wide,
And its latticed windows on either side,
And its step well worn by the beaded knees
Of one or two pious centuries,
Stands the village confessional!
Within it, as an honored guest,
I will sit down awhile and rest!

Seats himself in the confessional.

Here sits the priest; and faint and low,
Like the sighing of an evening breeze,
Comes through these painted lattices
The ceaseless sound of human woe;
Here, while her bosom aches and throbs
With deep and agonizing sobs,
That half are passion, half contrition,
The luckless daughter of perdition
Slowly confesses her secret shame!
The time, the place, the lover's name!
Here the grim murderer, with a groan,
From his bruised conscience rolls the stone,
Thinking that thus he can atone
For ravages of sword and flame!

Indeed, I marvel, and marvel greatly,
How a priest can sit here so sedately,
Reading, the whole year out and in,
Naught but the catalogue of sin,
And still keep any faith whatever
In human virtue!  Never! never!

I cannot repeat a thousandth part
Of the horrors and crimes and sins and woes
That arise, when with palpitating throes
The graveyard in the human heart
Gives up its dead, at the voice of the priest,
As if he were an archangel, at least.
It makes a peculiar atmosphere,
This odor of earthly passions and crimes,
Such as I like to breathe, at times,
And such as often brings me here
In the hottest and most pestilential season.
To-day, I come for another reason;
To foster and ripen an evil thought
In a heart that is almost to madness wrought,
And to make a murderer out of a prince,
A sleight of hand I learned long since!
He comes.  In the twilight he will not see
The difference between his priest and me!
In the same net was the mother caught!

PRINCE HENRY, entering and kneeling at the confessional.
Remorseful, penitent, and lowly,
I come to crave, O Father holy,
Thy benediction on my head.

LUCIFER.
The benediction shall be said
After confession, not before!
'T is a God-speed to the parting guest,
Who stands already at the door,
Sandalled with holiness, and dressed
In garments pure from earthly stain.
Meanwhile, hast thou searched well thy breast?
Does the same madness fill thy brain?
Or have thy passion and unrest
Vanished forever from thy mind?

PRINCE HENRY.
By the same madness still made blind,
By the same passion still possessed,
I come again to the house of prayer,
A man afflicted and distressed!
As in a cloudy atmosphere,
Through unseen sluices of the air,
A sudden and impetuous wind
Strikes the great forest white with fear,
And every branch, and bough, and spray,
Points all its quivering leaves one way,
And meadows of grass, and fields of rain,
And the clouds above, and the slanting rain,
And smoke from chimneys of the town,
Yield themselves to it, and bow down,
So does this dreadful purpose press
Onward, with irresistible stress,
And all my thoughts and faculties,
Struck level by the strength of this,
From their true inclination turn
And all stream forward to Salem!

LUCIFER.
Alas! we are but eddies of dust,
Uplifted by the blast, and whirled
Along the highway of the world
A moment only, then to fall
Back to a common level all,
At the subsiding of the gust!

PRINCE HENRY.
O holy Father! pardon in me
The oscillation of a mind
Unsteadfast, and that cannot find
Its centre of rest and harmony!
For evermore before mine eyes
This ghastly phantom flits and flies,
And as a madman through a crowd,
With frantic gestures and wild cries,
It hurries onward, and aloud
Repeats its awful prophecies!
Weakness is wretchedness!  To be strong
Is to be happy!  I am weak,
And cannot find the good I seek,
Because I feel and fear the wrong!

LUCIFER.
Be not alarmed!  The church is kind,
And in her mercy and her meekness
She meets half-way her children's weakness,
Writes their transgressions in the dust!
Though in the Decalogue we find
The mandate written, "Thou shalt not kill!"
Yet there are cases when we must.
In war, for instance, or from scathe
To guard and keep the one true faith
We must look at the Decalogue in the light
Of an ancient statute, that was meant
For a mild and general application,
To be understood with the reservation
That in certain instances the Right
Must yield to the Expedient!
Thou art a Prince.  If thou shouldst die
What hearts and hopes would prostrate lie!
What noble deeds, what fair renown,
Into the grave with thee go down!
What acts of valor and courtesy
Remain undone, and die with thee!
Thou art the last of all thy race!
With thee a noble name expires,
And vanishes from the earth's face
The glorious memory of thy sires!
She is a peasant.  In her veins
Flows common and plebeian blood;
It is such as daily and hourly stains
The dust and the turf of battle plains,
By vassals shed, in a crimson flood,
Without reserve and without reward,
At the slightest summons of their lord!
But thine is precious; the fore-appointed
Blood of kings, of God's anointed!
Moreover, what has the world in store
For one like her, but tears and toil?
Daughter of sorrow, serf of the soil,
A peasant's child and a peasant's wife,
And her soul within her sick and sore
With the roughness and barrenness of life!
I marvel not at the heart's recoil
From a fate like this, in one so tender,
Nor at its eagerness to surrender
All the wretchedness, want, and woe
That await it in this world below,
For the unutterable splendor
Of the world of rest beyond the skies.
So the Church sanctions the sacrifice:
Therefore inhale this healing balm,
And breathe this fresh life into thine;
Accept the comfort and the calm
She offers, as a gift divine;
Let her fall down and anoint thy feet
With the ointment costly and most sweet
Of her young blood, and thou shalt live.

PRINCE HENRY.
And will the righteous Heaven forgive?
No action, whether foal or fair,
Is ever done, but it leaves somewhere
A record, written by fingers ghostly,
As a blessing or a curse, and mostly
In the greater weakness or greater strength
Of the acts which follow it, till at length
The wrongs of ages are redressed,
And the justice of God made manifest!

LUCIFER.
In ancient records it is stated
That, whenever an evil deed is done,
Another devil is created
To scourge and torment the offending one!
But evil is only good perverted,
And Lucifer, the bearer of Light,
But an angel fallen and deserted,
Thrust from his Father's house with a curse
Into the black and endless night.

PRINCE HENRY.
If justice rules the universe,
From the good actions of good men
Angels of light should be begotten.
And thus the balance restored again.

LUCIFER.
Yes; if the world were not so rotten,
And so given over to the Devil!

PRINCE HENRY.
But this deed, is it good or evil?
Have I thine absolution free
To do it, and without restriction?

LUCIFER.
Ay; and from whatsoever sin
Lieth around it and within,
From all crimes in which it may involve thee,
I now release thee and absolve thee!

PRINCE HENRY.
Give me thy holy benediction.

LUCIFER, stretching forth his hand and muttering.
      Maledictione perpetua
      Maledicat vos
      Pater eternus!

THE ANGEL, with the aeolian harp.
Take heed! take heed!
Noble art thou in thy birth,
By the good and the great of earth
Hast thou been taught!
Be noble in every thought
And in every deed!
Let not the illusion of thy senses
Betray thee to deadly offences,
Be strong! be good! be pure!
The right only shall endure,
All things else are but false pretences.
I entreat thee, I implore,
Listen no more
To the suggestions of an evil spirit,
That even now is there,
Making the foul seem fair,
And selfishness itself a virtue and a merit!


A ROOM IN THE FARM-HOUSE

GOTTLIEB.
It is decided!  For many days,
And nights as many, we have had
A nameless terror in our breast,
Making us timid, and afraid
Of God, and his mysterious ways!
We have been sorrowful and sad;
Much have we suffered, much have prayed
That He would lead us as is best,
And show us what his will required.
It is decided; and we give
Our child, O Prince, that you may live!

URSULA.
It is of God.  He has inspired
This purpose in her: and through pain,
Out of a world of sin and woe,
He takes her to Himself again.
The mother's heart resists no longer;
With the Angel of the Lord in vain
It wrestled, for he was the stronger.

GOTTLIEB.
As Abraham offered long ago
His son unto the Lord, and even
The Everlasting Father in heaven
Gave his, as a lamb unto the slaughter,
So do I offer up my daughter!

URSULA hides her face.

ELSIE.
     My life is little,
     Only a cup of water,
     But pure and limpid.
     Take it, O my Prince!
     Let it refresh you,
     Let it restore you.
     It is given willingly,
     It is given freely;
     May God bless the gift!

PRINCE HENRY,
And the giver!

GOTTLIEB.
Amen!

PRINCE HENRY.
I accept it!

GOTTLIEB.
Where are the children?

URSULA.
They are already asleep.

GOTTLIEB.
What if they were dead?


IN THE GARDEN

ELSIE.
I have one thing to ask of you.

PRINCE HENRY.
                          What is it?
It is already granted.

ELSIE.
                       Promise me,
When we are gone from here, and on our way
Are journeying to Salerno, you will not,
By word or deed, endeavor to dissuade me
And turn me from my purpose; but remember
That as a pilgrim to the Holy City
Walks unmolested, and with thoughts of pardon
Occupied wholly, so would I approach
The gates of Heaven, in this great jubilee,
With my petition, putting off from me
All thoughts of earth, as shoes from off my feet.
Promise me this.

PRINCE HENRY.
Thy words fall from thy lips
Like roses from the lips of Angelo: and angels
Might stoop to pick them up!

ELSIE.
                Will you not promise?

PRINCE HENRY.
If ever we depart upon this journey,
So long to one or both of us, I promise.

ELSIE.
Shall we not go, then?  Have you lifted me
Into the air, only to hurl me back
Wounded upon the ground? and offered me
The waters of eternal life, to bid me
Drink the polluted puddles of the world?

PRINCE HENRY.
O Elsie! what a lesson thou dost teach me!
The life which is, and that which is to come,
Suspended hang in such nice equipoise
A breath disturbs the balance; and that scale
In which we throw our hearts preponderates,
And the other, like an empty one, flies up,
And is accounted vanity and air!
To me the thought of death is terrible,
Having such hold on life.  To thee it is not
So much even as the lifting of a latch;
Only a step into the open air
Out of a tent already luminous
With light that shines through its transparent walls!
O pure in heart! from thy sweet dust shall grow
Lilies, upon whose petals will be written
"Ave Maria" in characters of gold!



III

A STREET IN STRASBURG

Night.  PRINCE HENRY wandering alone, wrapped in a cloak.

PRINCE HENRY.
Still is the night.  The sound of feet
Has died away from the empty street,
And like an artisan, bending down
His head on his anvil, the dark town
Sleeps, with a slumber deep and sweet.
Sleepless and restless, I alone,
In the dusk and damp of these walls of stone,
Wander and weep in my remorse!

CRIER OF THE DEAD, ringing a bell.
      Wake! wake!
      All ye that sleep!
      Pray for the Dead!
      Pray for the Dead!

PRINCE HENRY.
Hark! with what accents loud and hoarse
This warder on the walls of death
Sends forth the challenge of his breath!
I see the dead that sleep in the grave!
They rise up and their garments wave,
Dimly and spectral, as they rise,
With the light of another world in their eyes!

CRIER OF THE DEAD.
      Wake! wake!
      All ye that sleep!
      Pray for the Dead!
      Pray for the Dead!

PRINCE HENRY,
Why for the dead, who are at rest?
Pray for the living, in whose breast
The struggle between right and wrong
Is raging terrible and strong,
As when good angels war with devils!
This is the Master of the Revels,
Who, at Life's flowing feast, proposes
The health of absent friends, and pledges,
Not in bright goblets crowned with roses,
And tinkling as we touch their edges,
But with his dismal, tinkling bell.
That mocks and mimics their funeral knell.

CRIER OP THE DEAD.
      Wake! wake!
      All ye that sleep!
      Pray for the Dead!
      Pray for the Dead!

PRINCE HENRY.
Wake not, beloved! be thy sleep
Silent as night is, and as deep!
There walks a sentinel at thy gate
Whose heart is heavy and desolate,
And the heavings of whose bosom number
The respirations of thy slumber,
As if some strange, mysterious fate
Had linked two hearts in one, and mine
Went madly wheeling about thine,
Only with wider and wilder sweep!

CRIER OP THE DEAD, at a distance.
      Wake! wake!
      All ye that sleep!
      Pray for the Dead!
      Pray for the Dead!

PRINCE HENRY.
Lo! with what depth of blackness thrown
Against the clouds, far up the skies
The walls of the cathedral rise,
Like a mysterious grove of stone,
With fitful lights and shadows blending,
As from behind, the moon ascending,
Lights its dim aisles and paths unknown!
The wind is rising; but the boughs
Rise not and fall not with the wind,
That through their foliage sobs and soughs;
Only the cloudy rack behind,
Drifting onward, wild and ragged,
Gives to each spire and buttress jagged
A seeming motion undefined.
Below on the square, an armed knight,
Still as a statue and as white,
Sits on his steed, and the moonbeams quiver
Upon the points of his armor bright
As on the ripples of a river.
He lifts the visor from his cheek,
And beckons, and makes as he would speak.

WALTER the Minnesinger.
Friend! can you tell me where alight
Thuringia's horsemen for the night?
For I have lingered in the rear,
And wander vainly up and down.

PRINCE HENRY.
I am a stranger in the town.
As thou art; but the voice I hear
Is not a stranger to mine ear.
Thou art Walter of the Vogelweid!

WALTER.
Thou hast guessed rightly; and thy name
Is Henry of Hoheneck!

PRINCE HENRY.
                      Ay, the same.

WALTER, embracing him.
Come closer, closer to my side!
What brings thee hither?  What potent charm
Has drawn thee from thy German farm
Into the old Alsatian city?

PRINCE HENRY.
A tale of wonder and of pity!
A wretched man, almost by stealth
Dragging my body to Salem,
In the vain hope and search for health,
And destined never to return.
Already thou hast heard the rest.
But what brings thee, thus armed and dight
In the equipments of a knight?

WALTER.
Dost thou not see upon my breast
The cross of the Crusaders shine?
My pathway leads to Palestine.

PRINCE HENRY.
Ah, would that way were also mine!
O noble poet! thou whose heart
Is like a nest of singing-birds
Rocked on the topmost bough of life,
Wilt thou, too, from our sky depart,
And in the clangor of the strife
Mingle the music of thy words?

WALTER.
My hopes are high, my heart is proud,
And like a trumpet long and loud,
Thither my thoughts all clang and ring!
My life is in my hand, and lo!
I grasp and bend it as a bow,
And shoot forth from its trembling string
An arrow, that shall be, perchance,
Like the arrow of the Israelite king
Shot from the window towards the east.
That of the Lord's deliverance!

PRINCE HENRY.
My life, alas! is what thou seest!
O enviable fate! to be
Strong, beautiful, and armed like thee
With lyre and sword, with song and steel;
A hand to smite, a heart to feel!
Thy heart, thy hand, thy lyre, thy sword,
Thou givest all unto thy Lord;
While I, so mean and abject grown,
Am thinking of myself alone,

WALTER.
Be patient; Time will reinstate
Thy health and fortunes.

PRINCE HENRY.
                       'T is too late!
I cannot strive against my fate!

WALTER.
Come with me; for my steed is weary;
Our journey has been long and dreary,
And, dreaming of his stall, he dints
With his impatient hoofs the flints.

PRINCE HENRY, aside.
I am ashamed, in my disgrace,
To look into that noble face!
To-morrow, Walter, let it be.

WALTER.
To-morrow, at the dawn of day,
I shall again be on my way.
Come with me to the hostelry,
For I have many things to say.
Our journey into Italy
Perchance together we may make;
Wilt thou not do it for my sake?

PRINCE HENRY.
A sick man's pace would but impede
Thine eager and impatient speed.
Besides, my pathway leads me round
To Hirsehau, in the forest's bound,
Where I assemble man and steed,
And all things for my journey's need.

They go out.

LUCIFER, flying over the city.
Sleep, sleep, O city! till the light
Wake you to sin and crime again,
Whilst on your dreams, like dismal rain,
I scatter downward through the night
My maledictions dark and deep.
I have more martyrs in your walls
Than God has; and they cannot sleep;
They are my bondsmen and my thralls;
Their wretched lives are full of pain,
Wild agonies of nerve and brain;
And every heart-beat, every breath,
Is a convulsion worse than death!
Sleep, sleep, O city! though within
The circuit of your walls there be
No habitation free from sin,
And all its nameless misery;
The aching heart, the aching head,
Grief for the living and the dead,
And foul corruption of the time,
Disease, distress, and want, and woe,
And crimes, and passions that may grow
Until they ripen into crime!


SQUARE IN FRONT OF THE CATHEDRAL

Easter Sunday.  FRIAR CUTHBERT preaching to the crowd from a
pulpit in the open air.  PRINCE HENRY and Elsie crossing the
square.

PRINCE HENRY.
This is the day, when from the dead
Our Lord arose; and everywhere,
Out of their darkness and despair,
Triumphant over fears and foes,
The hearts of his disciples rose,
When to the women, standing near,
The Angel in shining vesture said,
"The Lord is risen; he is not here!"
And, mindful that the day is come,
On all the hearths in Christendom
The fires are quenched, to be again
Rekindled from the sun, that high
Is dancing in the cloudless sky.
The churches are all decked with flowers,
The salutations among men
Are but the Angel's words divine,
"Christ is arisen!" and the bells
Catch the glad murmur, as it swells,
And chant together in their towers.
All hearts are glad; and free from care
The faces of the people shine.
See what a crowd is in the square,
Gayly and gallantly arrayed!

ELSIE.
Let us go back; I am afraid!

PRINCE HENRY.
Nay, let us mount the church-steps here,
Under the doorway's sacred shadow;
We can see all things, and be freer
From the crowd that madly heaves and presses!

ELSIE.
What a gay pageant! what bright dresses!
It looks like a flower-besprinkled meadow.
What is that yonder on the square?

PRINCE HENRY.
A pulpit in the open air,
And a Friar, who is preaching to the crowd
In a voice so deep and clear and loud,
That, if we listen, and give heed,
His lowest words will reach the ear.

FRIAR CUTHBERT, gesticulating and cracking a postilion's whip.
What ho! good people! do you not hear?
Dashing along at the top of his speed,
Booted and spurred, on his jaded steed,
A courier comes with words of cheer.
Courier! what is the news, I pray?
"Christ is arisen!"  Whence come you?  "From court."
Then I do not believe it; you say it in sport.

Cracks his whip again.

Ah, here comes another, riding this way;
We soon shall know what he has to say.
Courier! what are the tidings to-day?
"Christ is arisen!"  Whence come you?  "From town."
Then I do not believe it; away with you, clown.

Cracks his whip more violently.

And here comes a third, who is spurring amain;
What news do you bring, with your loose-hanging rein,
Your spurs wet with blood, and your bridle with foam?
"Christ is arisen!"  Whence come you?  "From Rome."
Ah, now I believe.  He is risen, indeed.
Ride on with the news, at the top of your speed!

Great applause among the crowd.

To come back to my text!  When the news was first spread
That Christ was arisen indeed from the dead,
Very great was the joy of the angels in heaven;
And as great the dispute as to who should carry
The tidings thereof to the Virgin Mary,
Pierced to the heart with sorrows seven.
Old Father Adam was first to propose,
As being the author of all our woes;
But he was refused, for fear, said they,
He would stop to eat apples on the way!
Abel came next, but petitioned in vain,
Because he might meet with his brother Cain!
Noah, too, was refused, lest his weakness for wine
Should delay him at every tavern-sign;
And John the Baptist could not get a vote,
On account of his old-fashioned camel's-hair coat;
And the Penitent Thief, who died on the cross,
Was reminded that all his bones were broken!
Till at last, when each in turn had spoken,
The company being still at loss,
The Angel, who rolled away the stone,
Was sent to the sepulchre, all alone.
And filled with glory that gloomy prison,
And said to the Virgin, "The Lord is arisen!"

The Cathedral bells ring.

But hark! the bells are beginning to chime;
And I feel that I am growing hoarse.
I will put an end to my discourse,
And leave the rest for some other time.
For the bells themselves are the best of preachers;
Their brazen lips are learned teachers,
From their pulpits of stone, in the upper air,
Sounding aloft, without crack or flaw,
Shriller than trumpets under the Law,
Now a sermon, and now a prayer.
The clangorous hammer is the tongue,
This way, that way, beaten and swung,
That from mouth of brass, as from Month of Gold,
May be taught the Testaments, New and Old,
And above it the great cross-beam of wood
Representeth the Holy Rood,
Upon which, like the bell, our hopes are hung.
And the wheel wherewith it is swayed and rung
Is the mind of man, that round and round
Sways, and maketh the tongue to sound!
And the rope, with its twisted cordage three,
Denoteth the Scriptural Trinity
Of Morals, and Symbols, and History;
And the upward and downward motion show
That we touch upon matters high and low;
And the constant change and transmutation
Of action and of contemplation,
Downward, the Scripture brought from on high,
Upward, exalted again to the sky;
Downward, the literal interpretation,
Upward, the Vision and Mystery!

And now, my hearers, to make an end,
I have only one word more to say;
In the church, in honor of Easter day
Will be presented a Miracle Play;
And I hope you will have the grace to attend.
Christ bring us at last to his felicity!
Pax vobiscum! et Benedicite!


IN THE CATHEDRAL

CHANT.
Kyrie Eleison
Christe Eleison!

ELSIE.
I am at home here in my Father's house!
These paintings of the Saints upon the walls
Have all familiar and benignant faces.

PRINCE HENRY.
The portraits of the family of God!
Thine own hereafter shall be placed among them.

ELSIE.
How very grand it is and wonderful!
Never have I beheld a church so splendid!
Such columns, and such arches, and such windows,
So many tombs and statues in the chapels,
And under them so many confessionals.
They must be for the rich.  I should not like
To tell my sins in such a church as this.
Who built it?

PRINCE HENRY.
            A great master of his craft,
Erwin von Steinbach; but not he alone,
For many generations labored with him.
Children that came to see these Saints in stone,
As day by day out of the blocks they rose,
Grew old and died, and still the work went on,
And on, and on, and is not yet completed.
The generation that succeeds our own
Perhaps may finish it.  The architect
Built his great heart into these sculptured stones,
And with him toiled his children, and their lives
Were builded, with his own, into the walls,
As offerings unto God.  You see that statue
Fixing its joyous, but deep-wrinkled eyes
Upon the Pillars of the Angels yonder.
That is the image of the master, carved
By the fair hand of his own child, Sabina.

ELSIE.
How beautiful is the column that he looks at!

PRINCE HENRY.
That, too, she sculptured.  At the base of it
Stand the Evangelists; above their heads
Four Angels blowing upon marble trumpets,
And over them the blessed Christ, surrounded
By his attendant ministers, upholding
The instruments of his passion.

ELSIE.
                          O my Lord!
Would I could leave behind me upon earth
Some monument to thy glory, such as this!

PRINCE HENRY.
A greater monument than this thou leavest
In thine own life, all purity and love!
See, too, the Rose, above the western portal
Resplendent with a thousand gorgeous colors,
The perfect flower of Gothic loveliness!

ELSIE.
And, in the gallery, the long line of statues,
Christ with his twelve Apostles watching us!

A Bishop in armor, booted and spurred, passes with his train.

PRINCE HENRY.
But come away; we have not time to look,
The crowd already fills the church, and yonder
Upon a stage, a herald with a trumpet,
Clad like the Angel Gabriel, proclaims
The Mystery that will now be represented.



THE NATIVITY

A MIRACLE-PLAY

INTROITUS

PRAECO.
Come, good people, all and each,
Come and listen to our speech!
In your presence here I stand,
With a trumpet in my hand,
To announce the Easter Play,
Which we represent to-day!
First of all we shall rehearse,
In our action and our verse,
The Nativity of our Lord,
As written in the old record
Of the Protevangelion,
So that he who reads may run!

Blows his trumpet.


I. HEAVEN.

MERCY, at the feet of God.
Have pity, Lord! be not afraid
To save mankind, whom thou hast made,
Nor let the souls that were betrayed
  Perish eternally!

JUSTICE.
It cannot be, it must not be!
When in the garden placed by thee,
The fruit of the forbidden tree
  He ate, and he must die!

MERCY.
Have pity, Lord! let penitence
Atone for disobedience,
Nor let the fruit of man's offence
  Be endless misery!

JUSTICE.
What penitence proportionate
Can e'er be felt for sin so great?
Of the forbidden fruit he ate,
  And damned must he be!

GOD.
He shall be saved, if that within
The bounds of earth one free from sin
Be found, who for his kith and kin
  Will suffer martyrdom.

THE FOUR VIRTUES.
Lord! we have searched the world around,
From centre to the utmost bound,
But no such mortal can be found;
  Despairing, back we come.

WISDOM.
No mortal, but a God-made man,
Can ever carry out this plan,
Achieving what none other can,
  Salvation unto all!

GOD.
Go, then, O my beloved Son!
It can by thee alone be done;
By thee the victory shall be won
  O'er Satan and the Fall!

Here the ANGEL GABRIEL shall leave Paradise and fly towards the
earth; the jaws of hell open below, and the Devils walk about,
making a great noise.


II. MARY AT THE WELL

MARY.
Along the garden walk, and thence
Through the wicket in the garden fence
  I steal with quiet pace,
My pitcher at the well to fill,
That lies so deep and cool and still
  In this sequestered place.

These sycamores keep guard around;
I see no face, I hear no sound,
  Save bubblings of the spring,
And my companions, who, within,
The threads of gold and scarlet spin,
  And at their labor sing.

THE ANGEL GABRIEL.
Hail, Virgin Mary, full of grace!

Here MARY looketh around her, trembling, and then saith:

MARY.
Who is it speaketh in this place,
  With such a gentle voice?

GABRIEL.
The Lord of heaven is with thee now!
Blessed among all women thou,
  Who art his holy choice!

MARY, setting down the pitcher.
What can this mean?  No one is near,
And yet, such sacred words I hear,
  I almost fear to stay.

Here the ANGEL, appearing to her, shall say:

GABRIEL.
Fear not, O Mary! but believe!
For thou, a Virgin, shalt conceive
  A child this very day.

Fear not, O Mary! from the sky
The Majesty of the Most High
  Shall overshadow thee!

MARY.
Behold the handmaid of the Lord!
According to thy holy word,
  So be it unto me!

Here the Devils shall again make a great noise, under the stage.


III.  THE ANGELS OF THE SEVEN PLANETS, BEARING THE STAR OF
BETHLEHEM

THE ANGELS.
The Angels of the Planets Seven,
Across the shining fields of heaven
  The natal star we bring!
Dropping our sevenfold virtues down
As priceless jewels in the crown
  Of Christ, our new-born King.

RAPHAEL.
I am the Angel of the Sun,
Whose flaming wheels began to run
  When God Almighty's breath
Said to the darkness and the Night,
Let there he light! and there was light!
  I bring the gift of Faith.

ONAFIEL.
I am the Angel of the Moon,
Darkened to be rekindled soon
  Beneath the azure cope!
Nearest to earth, it is my ray
That best illumes the midnight way;
  I bring the gift of Hope!

ANAEL.
The Angel of the Star of Love,
The Evening Star, that shines above
  The place where lovers be,
Above all happy hearths and homes,
On roofs of thatch, or golden domes,
  I give him Charity!

ZOBIACHEL.
The Planet Jupiter is mine!
The mightiest star of all that shine,
  Except the sun alone!
He is the High Priest of the Dove,
And sends, from his great throne above,
  Justice, that shall atone!

MICHAEL.
The Planet Mercury, whose place
Is nearest to the sun in space,
  Is my allotted sphere!
And with celestial ardor swift
I hear upon my hands the gift
  Of heavenly Prudence here!

URIEL.
I am the Minister of Mars,
The strongest star among the stars!
  My songs of power prelude
The march and battle of man's life,
And for the suffering and the strife,
  I give him Fortitude!

ORIFEL.
The Angel of the uttermost
Of all the shining, heavenly host,
  From the far-off expanse
Of the Saturnian, endless space
I bring the last, the crowning grace,
  The gift of Temperance!

A sudden light shines from the windows of the stable in the
village below.


IV. THE WISE MEN OF THE EAST

The stable of the Inn.  The VIRGIN and CHILD.  Three Gypsy Kings,
GASPAR, MELCHIOR, and BELSHAZZAR, shall come in.

GASPAR.
Hail to thee, Jesus of Nazareth!
Though in a manger thou draw breath,
Thou art greater than Life and Death,
  Greater than Joy or Woe!
This cross upon the line of life
Portendeth struggle, toil, and strife,
And through a region with peril rife
  In darkness shalt thou go!

MELCHIOR.
Hail to thee, King of Jerusalem!
Though humbly born in Bethlehem,
A sceptre and a diadem
  Await thy brow and hand!
The sceptre is a simple reed,
The crown will make thy temples bleed,
And in thine hour of greatest need,
  Abashed thy subjects stand!

BELSHAZZAR.
Hail to thee, Christ of Christendom!
O'er all the earth thy kingdom come!
From distant Trebizond to Rome
  Thy name shall men adore!
Peace and good-will among all men,
The Virgin has returned again,
Returned the old Saturnian reign
  And Golden Age once more.

THE CHILD CHRIST.
Jesus, the Son of God, am I,
Born here to suffer and to die
According to the prophecy,
  That other men may live!

THE VIRGIN.
And now these clothes, that wrapped Him, take
And keep them precious, for his sake;
Our benediction thus we make,
  Naught else have we to give.

She gives them swaddling-clothes and they depart.


V. THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT

Here JOSEPH shall come in, leading an ass, on which are seated
MARY and the CHILD.

MARY.
Here will we rest us, under these
O'erhanging branches of the trees,
Where robins chant their Litanies
  And canticles of joy.

JOSEPH.
My saddle-girths have given way
With trudging through the heat to-day;
To you I think it is but play
  To ride and hold the boy.

MARY.
Hark! how the robins shout and sing,
As if to hail their infant King!
I will alight at yonder spring
  To wash his little coat.

JOSEPH.
And I will hobble well the ass,
Lest, being loose upon the grass,
He should escape; for, by the mass,
  He's nimble as a goat.

Here MARY shall alight and go to the spring.

MARY.
O Joseph! I am much afraid,
For men are sleeping in the shade;
I fear that we shall be waylaid,
  And robbed and beaten sore!

Here a band of robbers shall be seen sleeping, two of whom shall
rise and come forward.

DUMACHUS.
Cock's soul! deliver up your gold!

JOSEPH.
I pray you, sirs, let go your hold!
You see that I am weak and old,
  Of wealth I have no store.

DUMACHUS.
Give up your money!

TITUS.
                    Prithee cease.
Let these people go in peace.

DUMACHUS.
First let them pay for their release,
  And then go on their way.

TITUS.
These forty groats I give in fee,
If thou wilt only silent be.

MARY.
May God be merciful to thee
  Upon the Judgment Day!

JESUS.
When thirty years shall have gone by,
I at Jerusalem shall die,
By Jewish hands exalted high
  On the accursed tree,
Then on my right and my left side,
These thieves shall both be crucified,
And Titus thenceforth shall abide
  In paradise with me.

Here a great rumor of trumpets and horses, like the noise of a
king with his army, and the robbers shall take flight.


VI. THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS

KING HEROD.
Potz-tausend!  Himmel-sacrament!
Filled am I with great wonderment
  At this unwelcome news!
Am I not Herod?  Who shall dare
My crown to take, my sceptre bear,
  As king among the Jews?

Here he shall stride up and down and flourish his sword.

What ho! I fain would drink a can
Of the strong wine of Canaan!
  The wine of Helbon bring
I purchased at the Fair of Tyre,
As red as blood, as hot as fire,
And fit for any king!

He quaffs great goblets of wine.

Now at the window will I stand,
While in the street the armed band
  The little children slay;
The babe just born in Bethlehem
Will surely slaughtered be with them,
  Nor live another day!

Here a voice of lamentation shall be heard in the street.

RACHEL.
O wicked king!  O cruel speed!
To do this most unrighteous deed!
  My children all are slain!

HEROD.
Ho, seneschal! another cup!
With wine of Sorek fill it up!
  I would a bumper drain!

RAHAB.
May maledictions fall and blast
Thyself and lineage to the last
  Of all thy kith and kin!

HEROD.
Another goblet! quick! and stir
Pomegranate juice and drops of myrrh
  And calamus therein!

SOLDIERS, in the street.
Give up thy child into our hands!
It is King Herod who commands
  That he should thus be slain!

THE NURSE MEDUSA.
O monstrous men!  What have ye done!
It is King Herod's only son
  That ye have cleft in twain!

HEROD.
Ah, luckless day!  What words of fear
Are these that smite upon my ear
  With such a doleful sound!
What torments rack my heart and head!
Would I were dead! would I were dead,
  And buried in the ground!

He falls down and writhes as though eaten by worms.  Hell opens,
and SATAN and ASTAROTH come forth and drag him down.


VII.  JESUS AT PLAY WITH HIS SCHOOLMATES

JESUS.
The shower is over.  Let us play,
And make some sparrows out of clay,
  Down by the river's side.

JUDAS.
See, how the stream has overflowed
Its banks, and o'er the meadow road
  Is spreading far and wide!

They draw water out of the river by channels and form little
pools. JESUS makes twelve sparrows of clay, and the other boys do
the same.

JESUS.
Look! look how prettily I make
These little sparrows by the lake
  Bend down their necks and drink!
Now will I make them sing and soar
So far, they shall return no more
  Unto this river's brink.

JUDAS.
That canst thou not!  They are but clay,
They cannot sing, nor fly away
  Above the meadow lands!

JESUS.
Fly, fly! ye sparrows! you are free!
And while you live, remember me,
  Who made you with my hands.

Here JESUS shall clap his hands, and the sparrows shall fly away,
chirruping.

JUDAS.
Thou art a sorcerer, I know;
Oft has my mother told me so,
  I will not play with thee!

He strikes JESUS in the right side.

JESUS.
Ah, Judas! thou hast smote my side,
And when I shall be crucified,
  There shall I pierced be!

Here JOSEPH shall come in and say:

JOSEPH.
Ye wicked boys! why do ye play,
And break the holy Sabbath day?
What, think ye, will your mothers say
  To see you in such plight!
In such a sweat and such a heat,
With all that mud upon your feet!
There's not a beggar in the street
 Makes such a sorry sight!


VIII.  THE VILLAGE SCHOOL

The RABBI BEN ISRAEL, sitting on a high stool, with a long beard,
and a rod in his hand.

RABBI.
I am the Rabbi Ben Israel,
Throughout this village known full well,
And, as my scholars all will tell,
  Learned in things divine;
The Cabala and Talmud hoar
Than all the prophets prize I more,
For water is all Bible lore,
  But Mishna is strong wine.

My fame extends from West to East,
And always, at the Purim feast,
I am as drunk as any beast
  That wallows in his sty;
The wine it so elateth me,
That I no difference can see
Between "Accursed Haman be!"
 And "Blessed be Mordecai!"

Come hither, Judas Iscariot;
Say, if thy lesson thou hast got
From the Rabbinical Book or not.
  Why howl the dogs at night?

JUDAS.
In the Rabbinical Book, it saith
The dogs howl, when with icy breath
Great Sammael, the Angel of Death,
  Takes through the town his flight!

RABBI.
Well, boy! now say, if thou art wise,
When the Angel of Death, who is full of eyes,
Comes where a sick man dying lies,
  What doth he to the wight?

JUDAS.
He stands beside him, dark and tall,
Holding a sword, from which doth fall
Into his mouth a drop of gall,
  And so he turneth white.

RABBI.
And now, my Judas, say to me
What the great Voices Four may be,
That quite across the world do flee,
  And are not heard by men?

JUDAS.
The Voice of the Sun in heaven's dome,
The Voice of the Murmuring of Rome,
The Voice of a Soul that goeth home,
  And the Angel of the Rain!

RABBI.
Right are thine answers every one!
Now, little Jesus, the carpenter's son,
Let us see how thy task is done;
  Canst thou thy letters say?

JESUS.
Aleph.

RABBI.
        What next? Do not stop yet!
Go on with all the alphabet.
Come, Aleph, Beth; dost thou forget?
  Cock's soul! thou'dst rather play!

JESUS.
What Aleph means I fain would know
Before I any farther go!

RABBI.
Oh, by Saint Peter! wouldst thou so?
  Come hither, boy, to me.
As surely as the letter Jod
Once cried aloud, and spake to God,
So surely shalt thou feel this rod,
  And punished shalt thou be!

Here RABBI BEN ISRAEL shall lift up his rod to strike Jesus, and
his right arm shall be paralyzed.


IX.  CROWNED WITH FLOWERS

JESUS sitting among his playmates, crowned with flowers as their
King.

BOYS.
We spread our garments on the ground!
With fragrant flowers thy head is crowned
While like a guard we stand around,
  And hail thee as our King!
Thou art the new King of the Jews!
Nor let the passers-by refuse
To bring that homage which men use
  To majesty to bring.

Here a traveller shall go by, and the boys shall lay hold of his
garments and say:

BOYS.
Come hither I and all reverence pay
Unto our monarch, crowned to-day!
Then go rejoicing on your way,
  In all prosperity!

TRAVELLER.
Hail to the King of Bethlehem,
Who weareth in his diadem
The yellow crocus for the gem
  Of his authority!

He passes by; and others come in, bearing on a litter a sick
child.

BOYS.
Set down the litter and draw near!
The King of Bethlehem is here!
What ails the child, who seems to fear
  That we shall do him harm?

THE BEARERS.
He climbed up to the robin's nest,
And out there darted, from his rest,
A serpent with a crimson crest,
  And stung him in the arm.

JESUS.
Bring him to me, and let me feel
The wounded place; my touch can heal
The sting of serpents, and can steal
  The poison from the bite!

He touches the wound, and the boy begins to cry.

Cease to lament!  I can foresee
That thou hereafter known shalt be,
Among the men who follow me,
  As Simon the Canaanite!

EPILOGUE
  In the after part of the day
  Will be represented another play,
  Of the Passion of our Blessed Lord,
  Beginning directly after Nones!
  At the close of which we shall accord,
  By way of benison and reward,
  The sight of a holy Martyr's bones!


IV

THE ROAD TO HIRSCHAU

PRINCE HENRY and ELSIE, with their attendants on horseback.

ELSIE.
Onward and onward the highway runs to the distant city,
     impatiently bearing
Tidings of human joy and disaster, of love and of hate,
     of doing and daring!

PRINCE HENRY.
This life of ours is a wild aeolian harp of many
     a joyous strain,
But under them all there runs a loud perpetual wail,
     as of souls in pain.

ELSIE.
Faith alone can interpret life, and the heart
     that aches and bleeds with the stigma
Of pain, alone bears the likeness of Christ,
     and can comprehend its dark enigma.

PRINCE HENRY.
Man is selfish, and seeketh pleasure with little care
     of what may betide,
Else why am I travelling here beside thee,
     a demon that rides by an angel's side?

ELSIE.
All the hedges are white with dust, and the great dog
     under the creaking wain
Hangs his head in the lazy heat, while onward
     the horses toil and strain.

PRINCE HENRY.
Now they stop at the wayside inn, and the wagoner laughs
     with the landlord's daughter,
While out of the dripping trough the horses
     distend their leathern sides with water.

ELSIE.
All through life there are wayside inns,
     where man may refresh his soul with love;
Even the lowest may quench his thirst
     at rivulets fed by springs from above.

PRINCE HENRY.
Yonder, where rises the cross of stone,
     our journey along the highway ends,
And over the fields, by a bridle path,
     down into the broad green valley descends.

ELSIE.
I am not sorry to leave behind the beaten road
     with its dust and heat
The air will be sweeter far, and the turf will be softer
     under our horses' feet.

They turn down a green lane.

ELSIE.
Sweet is the air with the budding haws,
     and the valley stretching for miles below
Is white with blossoming cherry-trees,
     as if just covered with lightest snow.

PRINCE HENRY.
Over our heads a white cascade is gleaming
     against the distant hill;
We cannot hear it, nor see it move, but it hangs
     like a banner when winds are still.

ELSIE.
Damp and cool is this deep ravine, and cool
     the sound of the brook by our side!
What is this castle that rises above us,
     and lords it over a land so wide?

PRINCE HENRY.
It is the home of the Counts of Calva;
     well have I known these scenes of old,
Well I remember each tower and turret, remember the brooklet,
     the wood, and the wold.

ELSIE.
Hark! from the little village below us the bells
     of the church are ringing for rain!
Priests and peasants in long procession come forth
     and kneel on the arid plain.

PRINCE HENRY.
They have not long to wait, for I see in the south
     uprising a little cloud,
That before the sun shall be set will cover
     the sky above us as with a shroud.

They pass on.


THE CONVENT OF HIRSCHAU IN THE BLACK FOREST.

The Convent cellar.  FRIAR CLAUS comes in with a light and a
basket of empty flagons.

FRIAR CLAUS.
I always enter this sacred place
With a thoughtful, solemn, and reverent pace,
Pausing long enough on each stair
To breathe an ejaculatory prayer,
And a benediction on the vines
That produce these various sorts of wines!
For my part, I am well content
That we have got through with the tedious Lent!
Fasting is all very well for those
Who have to contend with invisible foes;
But I am quite sure it does not agree
With a quiet, peaceable man like me,
Who am not of that nervous and meagre kind,
That are always distressed in body and mind!
And at times it really does me good
To come down among this brotherhood,
Dwelling forever underground,
Silent, contemplative, round and sound;
Each one old, and brown with mould,
But filled to the lips with the ardor of youth,
With the latent power and love of truth,
And with virtues fervent and manifold.

I have heard it said, that at Easter-tide,
When buds are swelling on every side,
And the sap begins to move in the vine,
Then in all cellars, far and wide,
The oldest as well as the newest wine
Begins to stir itself, and ferment,
With a kind of revolt and discontent
At being so long in darkness pent,
And fain would burst from its sombre tun
To bask on the hillside in the sun;
As in the bosom of us poor friars,
The tumult of half-subdued desires
For the world that we have left behind
Disturbs at times all peace of mind!
And now that we have lived through Lent,
My duty it is, as often before,
To open awhile the prison-door,
And give these restless spirits vent.

Now here is a cask that stands alone,
And has stood a hundred years or more,
Its beard of cobwebs, long and hoar,
Trailing and sweeping along the floor,
Like Barbarossa, who sits in his cave,
Taciturn, sombre, sedate, and grave,
Till his beard has grown through the table of stone!
It is of the quick and not of the dead!
In its veins the blood is hot and red,
And a heart still beats in those ribs of oak
That time may have tamed, but has not broke!
It comes from Bacharach on the Rhine,
Is one of the three best kinds of wine,
And costs some hundred florins the ohm;
But that I do not consider dear,
When I remember that every year
Four butts are sent to the Pope of Rome.
And whenever a goblet thereof I drain,
The old rhyme keeps running in my brain;

  At Bacharach on the Rhine,
  At Hochheim on the Main,
  And at Wurzburg on the Stein,
  Grow the three best kinds of wine!

They are all good wines, and better far
Than those of the Neckar, or those of the Ahr.
In particular, Wurzburg well may boast
Of its blessed wine of the Holy Ghost,
Which of all wines I like the most.
This I shall draw for the Abbot's drinking,
Who seems to be much of my way of thinking.

Fills a flagon.

Ah! how the streamlet laughs and sings!
What a delicious fragrance springs
From the deep flagon, while it fills,
As of hyacinths and daffodils!
Between this cask and the Abbot's lips
Many have been the sips and slips;
Many have been the draughts of wine,
On their way to his, that have stopped at mine;
And many a time my soul has hankered
For a deep draught out of his silver tankard,
When it should have been busy with other affairs,
Less with its longings and more with its prayers.
But now there is no such awkward condition,
No danger of death and eternal perdition;
So here's to the Abbot and Brothers all,
Who dwell in this convent of Peter and Paul!

He drinks.

O cordial delicious!  O soother of pain!
It flashes like sunshine into my brain!
A benison rest on the Bishop who sends
Such a fudder of wine as this to his friends!
And now a flagon for such as may ask
A draught from the noble Bacharach cask,
And I will be gone, though I know full well
The cellar's a cheerfuller place than the cell.
Behold where he stands, all sound and good,
Brown and old in his oaken hood;
Silent he seems externally
As any Carthusian monk may be;
But within, what a spirit of deep unrest!
What a seething and simmering in his breast!
As if the heaving of his great heart
Would burst his belt of oak apart!
Let me unloose this button of wood,
And quiet a little his turbulent mood.

Sets it running.

See! how its currents gleam and shine,
As if they had caught the purple hues
Of autumn sunsets on the Rhine,
Descending and mingling with the dews;
Or as if the grapes were stained with the blood
Of the innocent boy, who, some years back,
Was taken and crucified by the Jews,
In that ancient town of Bacharach!
Perdition upon those infidel Jews,
In that ancient town of Bacharach!
The beautiful town, that gives us wine
With the fragrant odor of Muscadine!
I should deem it wrong to let this pass
Without first touching my lips to the glass,
For here in the midst of the current I stand
Like the stone Pfalz in the midst of the river,
Taking toll upon either hand,
And much more grateful to the giver.

He drinks.

Here, now, is a very inferior kind,
Such as in any town you may find,
Such as one might imagine would suit
The rascal who drank wine out of a boot.
And, after all, it was not a crime,
For he won thereby Dorf Huffelsheim.
A jolly old toper! who at a pull
Could drink a postilion's jack-boot full,
And ask with a laugh, when that was done,
If the fellow had left the other one!
This wine is as good as we can afford
To the friars who sit at the lower board,
And cannot distinguish bad from good,
And are far better off than if they could,
Being rather the rude disciples of beer,
Than of anything more refined and dear!

Fills the flagon and departs.


THE SCRIPTORIUM

FRIAR PACIFICUS transcribing and illuminating.

FRIAR PACIFICUS.
It is growing dark!  Yet one line more,
And then my work for to-day is o'er.
I come again to the name of the Lord!
Ere I that awful name record,
That is spoken so lightly among men,
Let me pause awhile and wash my pen;
Pure from blemish and blot must it be
When it writes that word of mystery!

Thus have I labored on and on,
Nearly through the Gospel of John.
Can it be that from the lips
Of this same gentle Evangelist,
That Christ himself perhaps has kissed,
Came the dread Apocalypse!
It has a very awful look,
As it stands there at the end of the book,
Like the sun in an eclipse.
Ah me! when I think of that vision divine,
Think of writing it, line by line,
I stand in awe of the terrible curse,
Like the trump of doom, in the closing verse!
God forgive me! if ever I
Take aught from the book of that Prophecy,
Lest my part too should be taken away
From the Book of Life on the Judgment Day.
This is well written, though I say it!
I should not be afraid to display it
In open day, on the selfsame shelf
With the writings of St. Thecla herself,
Or of Theodosius, who of old
Wrote the Gospels in letters of gold!
That goodly folio standing yonder,
Without a single blot or blunder,
Would not bear away the palm from mine,
If we should compare them line for line.

There, now, is an initial letter!
Saint Ulric himself never made a better!
Finished down to the leaf and the snail,
Down to the eyes on the peacock's tail!
And now, as I turn the volume over,
And see what lies between cover and cover,
What treasures of art these pages hold,
All ablaze with crimson and gold,
God forgive me! I seem to feel
A certain satisfaction steal
Into my heart, and into my brain,
As if my talent had not lain
Wrapped in a napkin, and all in vain.
Yes, I might almost say to the Lord,
Here is a copy of thy Word,
Written out with much toil and pain;
Take it, O Lord, and let it be
As something I have done for thee!

He looks from the window.

How sweet the air is! how fair the scene!
I wish I had as lovely a green
To paint my landscapes and my leaves!
How the swallows twitter under the eaves!
There, now, there is one in her nest;
I can just catch a glimpse of her head and breast,
And will sketch her thus, in her quiet nook
For the margin of my Gospel book.

He makes a sketch.

I can see no more.  Through the valley yonder
A shower is passing; I hear the thunder
Mutter its curses in the air,
The devil's own and only prayer!
The dusty road is brown with rain,
And, speeding on with might and main,
Hitherward rides a gallant train.
They do not parley, they cannot wait,
But hurry in at the convent gate.
What a fair lady! and beside her
What a handsome, graceful, noble rider!
Now she gives him her hand to alight;
They will beg a shelter for the night.
I will go down to the corridor,
And try to see that face once more;
It will do for the face of some beautiful Saint,
Or for one of the Maries I shall paint.

Goes out.


THE CLOISTERS

The ABBOT ERNESTUS pacing to and fro.

ABBOT.
 Slowly, slowly up the wall
 Steals the sunshine, steals the shade;
 Evening damps begin to fall,
 Evening shadows are displayed.
 Round me, o'er me, everywhere,
 All the sky is grand with clouds,
 And athwart the evening air
 Wheel the swallows home in crowds.
 Shafts of sunshine from the west
 Paint the dusky windows red;
 Darker shadows, deeper rest,
 Underneath and overhead.
 Darker, darker, and more wan,
 In my breast the shadows fall;
 Upward steals the life of man,
 As the sunshine from the wall.
 From the wall into the sky,
 From the roof along the spire;
 Ah, the souls of those that die
 Are but sunbeams lifted higher.

Enter PRINCE HENRY.

PRINCE HENRY.
Christ is arisen!

ABBOT.
                   Amen!  He is arisen!
His peace be with you!

PRINCE HENRY.
                Here it reigns forever!
The peace of God, that passeth understanding,
Reigns in these cloisters and these corridors.
Are you Ernestus, Abbot of the convent?

ABBOT.
I am.

PRINCE HENRY.
      And I Prince Henry of Hoheneck,
Who crave your hospitality to-night.

ABBOT.
You are thrice welcome to our humble walls.
You do us honor; and we shall requite it,
I fear, but poorly, entertaining you
With Paschal eggs, and our poor convent wine,
The remnants of our Easter holidays.

PRINCE HENRY.
How fares it with the holy monks of Hirschau?
Are all things well with them?

ABBOT.
                    All things are well.

PRINCE HENRY.
A noble convent!  I have known it long
By the report of travellers.  I now see
Their commendations lag behind the truth.
You lie here in the valley of the Nagold
As in a nest: and the still river, gliding
Along its bed, is like an admonition
How all things pass.  Your lands are rich and ample,
And your revenues large.  God's benediction
Rests on your convent.

ABBOT.
                       By our charities
We strive to merit it.  Our Lord and Master,
When He departed, left us in his will,
As our best legacy on earth, the poor!
These we have always with us; had we not,
Our hearts would grow as hard as are these stones.

PRINCE HENRY.
If I remember right, the Counts of Calva
Founded your convent.

ABBOT.
                     Even as you say.

PRINCE HENRY.
And, if I err not, it is very old.

ABBOT.
Within these cloisters lie already buried
Twelve holy Abbots.  Underneath the flags
On which we stand, the Abbot William lies,
Of blessed memory.

PRINCE HENRY.
              And whose tomb is that,
Which bears the brass escutcheon?

ABBOT.
                        A benefactor's.
Conrad, a Count of Calva, he who stood
Godfather to our bells.

PRINCE HENRY.
              Your monks are learned
And holy men, I trust.

ABBOT.
               There are among them
Learned and holy men.  Yet in this age
We need another Hildebrand, to shake
And purify us like a mighty wind.
The world is wicked, and sometimes I wonder
God does not lose his patience with it wholly,
And shatter it like glass!  Even here, at times,
Within these walls, where all should be at peace,
I have my trials.  Time has laid his hand
Upon my heart, gently, not smiting it,
But as a harper lays his open palm
Upon his harp to deaden its vibrations,
Ashes are on my head, and on my lips
Sackcloth, and in my breast a heaviness
And weariness of life, that makes me ready
To say to the dead Abbots under us,
"Make room for me!"  Ony I see the dusk
Of evening twilight coming, and have not
Completed half my task; and so at times
The thought of my shortcomings in this life
Falls like a shadow on the life to come.

PRINCE HENRY.
We must all die, and not the old alone;
The young have no exemption from that doom.

ABBOT.
Ah, yes! the young may die, but the old must!
That is the difference.

PRINCE HENRY.
                I have heard much laud
Of your transcribers, Your Scriptorium
Is famous among all; your manuscripts
Praised for their beauty and their excellence.

ABBOT.
That is indeed our boast.  If you desire it
You shall behold these treasures.  And meanwhile
Shall the Refectorarius bestow
Your horses and attendants for the night.

They go in.  The Vesper-bell rings.


THE CHAPEL

Vespers: after which the monks retire, a chorister leading an old
monk who is blind.

PRINCE HENRY.
They are all gone, save one who lingers,
Absorbed in deep and silent prayer.
As if his heart could find no rest,
At times he beats his heaving breast
With clenched and convulsive fingers,
Then lifts them trembling in the air.
A chorister, with golden hair,
Guides hitherward his heavy pace.
Can it be so?  Or does my sight
Deceive me in the uncertain light?
Ah no!  I recognize that face
Though Time has touched it in his flight,
And changed the auburn hair to white.
It is Count Hugo of the Rhine,
The deadliest foe of all our race,
And hateful unto me and mine!

THE BLIND MONK.
Who is it that doth stand so near
His whispered words I almost hear?

PRINCE HENRY.
I am Prince Henry of Hoheneck,
And you, Count Hugo of the Rhine!
I know you, and I see the scar,
The brand upon your forehead, shine
And redden like a baleful star!

THE BLIND MONK.
Count Hugo once, but now the wreck
Of what I was.  O Hoheneck!
The passionate will, the pride, the wrath
That bore me headlong on my path,
Stumbled and staggered into fear,
And failed me in my mad career,
As a tired steed some evil-doer,
Alone upon a desolate moor,
Bewildered, lost, deserted, blind,
And hearing loud and close behind
The o'ertaking steps of his pursuer.
Then suddenly from the dark there came
A voice that called me by my name,
And said to me, "Kneel down and pray!"
And so my terror passed away,
Passed utterly away forever.
Contrition, penitence, remorse,
Came on me, with o'erwhelming force;
A hope, a longing, an endeavor,
By days of penance and nights of prayer,
To frustrate and defeat despair!
Calm, deep, and still is now my heart,
With tranquil waters overflowed;
A lake whose unseen fountains start,
Where once the hot volcano glowed.
And you, O Prince of Hoheneck!
Have known me in that earlier time,
A man of violence and crime,
Whose passions brooked no curb nor check.
Behold me now, in gentler mood,
One of this holy brotherhood.
Give me your hand; here let me kneel;
Make your reproaches sharp as steel;
Spurn me, and smite me on each cheek;
No violence can harm the meek,
There is no wound Christ cannot heal!
Yes; lift your princely hand, and take
Revenge, if 't is revenge you seek;
Then pardon me, for Jesus' sake!

PRINCE HENRY.
Arise, Count Hugo! let there be
No further strife nor enmity
Between us twain; we both have erred
Too rash in act, too wroth in word,
From the beginning have we stood
In fierce, defiant attitude,
Each thoughtless of the other's right,
And each reliant on his might.
But now our souls are more subdued;
The hand of God, and not in vain,
Has touched us with the fire of pain.
Let us kneel down and side by side
Pray till our souls are purified,
And pardon will not be denied!

They kneel.


THE REFECTORY

Gaudiolum of Monks at midnight.  LUCIFER disguised as a Friar.

FRIAR PAUL sings.
     Ave! color vini clari,
     Dulcis potus, non amari,
     Tua nos inebriari
      Digneris potentia!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
Not so much noise, my worthy freres,
You'll disturb the Abbot at his prayers.

FRIAR PAUL sings.
     O! quam placens in colore!
     O! quam fragrans in odore!
     O! quam sapidum in ore!
      Dulce linguae vinculum!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
I should think your tongue had broken its chain!

FRIAR PAUL sings.
     Felix venter quem intrabis!
     Felix guttur quod rigabis!
     Felix os quod tu lavabis!
      Et beata labia!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
Peace! I say, peace!
Will you never cease!
You will rouse up the Abbot, I tell you again!

FRIAR JOHN.
No danger! to-night he will let us alone,
As I happen to know he has guests of his own.

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
Who are they?

FRIAR JOHN.
A German Prince and his train,
Who arrived here just before the rain.
There is with him a damsel fair to see,
As slender and graceful as a reed!
When she alighted from her steed,
It seemed like a blossom blown from a tree.

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
None of your pale-faced girls for me!
None of your damsels of high degree!

FRIAR JOHN.
Come, old fellow, drink down to your peg!
But do not drink any further, I beg!

FRIAR PAUL sings.
     In the days of gold,
     The days of old,
     Crosier of wood
     And bishop of gold!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
What an infernal racket and riot!
Can you not drink your wine in quiet?
Why fill the convent with such scandals,
As if we were so many drunken Vandals?

FRIAR PAUL continues.
     Now we have changed
     That law so good
     To crosier of gold
     And bishop of wood!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
Well, then, since you are in the mood
To give your noisy humors vent,
Sing and howl to your heart's content!

CHORUS OF MONKS.
  Funde vinum, funde!
  Tanquam sint fluminis undae,
  Nec quaeras unde,
  Sed fundas semper abunde!

FRIAR JOHN.
What is the name of yonder friar,
With an eye that glows like a coal of fire,
And such a black mass of tangled hair?

FRIAR PAUL.
He who is sitting there,
With a rollicking,
Devil may care,
Free and easy look and air,
As if he were used to such feasting and frolicking?

FRIAR JOHN.
The same.

FRIAR PAUL.
He's a stranger.  You had better ask his name,
And where he is going and whence he came.

FRIAR JOHN.
Hallo!  Sir Friar!

FRIAR PAUL.
You must raise your voice a little higher,
He does not seem to hear what you say.
Now, try again!  He is looking this way.

FRIAR JOHN.
Hallo! Sir Friar,
We wish to inquire
Whence you came, and where you are going,
And anything else that is worth the knowing.
So be so good as to open your head.

LUCIFER.
I am a Frenchman born and bred,
Going on a pilgrimage to Rome.
My home
Is the convent of St. Gildas de Rhuys,
Of which, very like, you never have heard.

MONKS.
Never a word.

LUCIFER.
You must know, then, it is in the diocese
Called the Diocese of Vannes,
In the province of Brittany.
From the gray rocks of Morbihan
It overlooks the angry sea;
The very sea-shore where,
In his great despair,
Abbot Abelard walked to and fro,
Filling the night with woe,
And wailing aloud to the merciless seas
The name of his sweet Heloise,
Whilst overhead
The convent windows gleamed as red
As the fiery eyes of the monks within,
Who with jovial din
Gave themselves up to all kinds of sin!
Ha! that is a convent! that is an abbey!
Over the doors,
None of your death-heads carved in wood,
None of your Saints looking pious and good,
None of your Patriarchs old and shabby!
But the heads and tusks of boars,
And the cells
Hung all round with the fells
Of the fallow-deer.
And then what cheer!
What jolly, fat friars,
Sitting round the great, roaring fires,
Roaring louder than they,
With their strong wines,
And their concubines,
And never a bell,
With its swagger and swell,
Calling you up with a start of affright
In the dead of night,
To send you grumbling down dark stairs,
To mumble your prayers;
But the cheery crow
Of cocks in the yard below,
After daybreak, an hour or so,
And the barking of deep-mouthed hounds,
These are the sounds
That, instead of bells, salute the ear.
And then all day
Up and away
Through the forest, hunting the deer!
Ah, my friends, I'm afraid that here
You are a little too pious, a little too tame,
And the more is the shame.
'T is the greatest folly
Not to be jolly;
That's what I think!
Come, drink, drink,
Drink, and die game!

MONKS.
And your Abbot What's-his-name?

LUCIFER.
Abelard!

MONKS.
Did he drink hard?

LUCIFER.
Oh, no!  Not he!
He was a dry old fellow,
Without juice enough to get thoroughly mellow.
There he stood,
Lowering at us in sullen mood,
As if he had come into Brittany
Just to reform our brotherhood!

A roar of laughter.

But you see
It never would do!
For some of us knew a thing or two,
In the Abbey of St. Gildas de Rhuys!
For instance, the great ado
With old Fulbert's niece,
The young and lovely Heloise.

FRIAR JOHN.
Stop there, if you please,
Till we drink so the fair Heloise.

ALL, drinking and shouting.
Heloise!  Heloise!

The Chapel-bell tolls.

LUCIFER, starting.
What is that bell for!  Are you such asses
As to keep up the fashion of midnight masses?

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
It is only a poor unfortunate brother,
Who is gifted with most miraculous powers
Of getting up at all sorts of hours,
And, by way of penance and Christian meekness,
Of creeping silently out of his cell
To take a pull at that hideous bell;
So that all monks who are lying awake
May murmur some kind of prayer for his sake,
And adapted to his peculiar weakness!

FRIAR JOHN.
From frailty and fall--

ALL.
Good Lord, deliver us all!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
And before the bell for matins sounds,
He takes his lantern, and goes the rounds,
Flashing it into our sleepy eyes,
Merely to say it is time to arise.
But enough of that.  Go on, if you please,
With your story about St. Gildas de Rhuys.

LUCIFER.
Well, it finally came to pass
That, half in fun and half in malice,
One Sunday at Mass
We put some poison into the chalice.
But, either by accident or design,
Peter Abelard kept away
From the chapel that day,
And a poor young friar, who in his stead
Drank the sacramental wine,
Fell on the steps of the altar, dead!
But look! do you see at the window there
That face, with a look of grief and despair,
That ghastly face, as of one in pain?

MONKS.
Who?  where?

LUCIFER.
As I spoke, it vanished away again.

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
It is that nefarious
Siebald the Refectorarius,
That fellow is always playing the scout,
Creeping and peeping and prowling about;
And then he regales
The Abbot with scandalous tales.

LUCIFER.
A spy in the convent?  One of the brothers
Telling scandalous tales of the others?
Out upon him, the lazy loon!
I would put a stop to that pretty soon,
In a way he should rue it.

MONKS.
How shall we do it!

LUCIFER.
Do you, brother Paul,
Creep under the window, close to the wall,
And open it suddenly when I call.
Then seize the villain by the hair,
And hold him there,
And punish him soundly, once for all.

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
As Saint Dunstan of old,
We are told,
Once caught the Devil by the nose!

LUCIFER.
Ha! ha! that story is very clever,
But has no foundation whatsoever.
Quick! for I see his face again
Glaring in at the window-pane;
Now! now! and do not spare your blows.

FRIAR PAUL opens the window suddenly, and seizes SIEBALD.
They beat him.

FRIAR SIEBALD.
Help! help! are you going to slay me?

FRIAR PAUL.
That will teach you again to betray me!

FRIAR SIEBALD.
Mercy! mercy!

FRIAR PAUL, shouting and beating.

     Rumpas bellorum lorum
     Vim confer amorum
     Morum verorum rorum
     Tu plena polorum!

LUCIFER.
Who stands in the doorway yonder,
Stretching out his trembling hand,
Just as Abelard used to stand,
The flash of his keen, black eyes
Forerunning the thunder?

THE MONKS, in confusion.
The Abbot! the Abbot!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
            And what is the wonder!
He seems to have taken you by surprise.

FRIAR FRANCIS.
Hide the great flagon
From the eyes of the dragon!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
Pull the brown hood over your face!
This will bring us into disgrace!

ABBOT.
What means this revel and carouse?
Is this a tavern and drinking-house?
Are you Christian monks, or heathen devils,
To pollute this convent with your revels?
Were Peter Damian still upon earth,
To be shocked by such ungodly mirth,
He would write your names, with pen of gall,
In his Book of Gomorrah, one and all!
Away, you drunkards! to your cells,
And pray till you hear the matin-bells;
You, Brother Francis, and you, Brother Paul!
And as a penance mark each prayer
With the scourge upon your shoulders bare;
Nothing atones for such a sin
But the blood that follows the discipline.
And you, Brother Cuthbert, come with me
Alone into the sacristy;
You, who should be a guide to your brothers,
And are ten times worse than all the others,
For you I've a draught that has long been brewing,
You shall do a penance worth the doing!
Away to your prayers, then, one and all!
I wonder the very convent wall
Does not crumble and crush you in its fall!


THE NEIGHBORING NUNNERY

The ABBESS IRMINGARD Sitting with ELSIE in the moonlight.

IRMINGARD.
The night is silent, the wind is still,
The moon is looking from yonder hill
Down upon convent, and grove, and garden;
The clouds have passed away from her face,
Leaving behind them no sorrowful trace,
Only the tender and quiet grace
Of one whose heart has been healed with pardon!

And such am I.  My soul within
Was dark with passion and soiled with sin.
But now its wounds are healed again;
Gone are the anguish, the terror, and pain;
For across that desolate land of woe,
O'er whose burning sands I was forced to go,
A wind from heaven began to blow;
And all my being trembled and shook,
As the leaves of the tree, or the grass of the field,
And I was healed, as the sick are healed,
When fanned by the leaves of the Holy Book!

As thou sittest in the moonlight there,
Its glory flooding thy golden hair,
And the only darkness that which lies
In the haunted chambers of thine eyes,
I feel my soul drawn unto thee,
Strangely, and strongly, and more and more,
As to one I have known and loved before;
For every soul is akin to me
That dwells in the land of mystery!
I am the Lady Irmingard,
Born of a noble race and name!
Many a wandering Suabian bard,
Whose life was dreary, and bleak, and hard,
Has found through me the way to fame.

Brief and bright were those days, and the night
Which followed was full of a lurid light.
Love, that of every woman's heart
Will have the whole, and not a part,
That is to her, in Nature's plan,
More than ambition is to man,
Her light, her life, her very breath,
With no alternative but death,
Found me a maiden soft and young,
Just from the convent's cloistered school,
And seated on my lowly stool,
Attentive while the minstrels sung.

Gallant, graceful, gentle, tall,
Fairest, noblest, best of all,
Was Walter of the Vogelweid;
And, whatsoever may betide,
Still I think of him with pride!
His song was of the summer-time,
The very birds sang in his rhyme;
The sunshine, the delicious air,
The fragrance of the flowers, were there;
And I grew restless as I heard,
Restless and buoyant as a bird,
Down soft, aerial currents sailing,
O'er blossomed orchards and fields in bloom,
And through the momentary gloom,
Of shadows o'er the landscape trailing,
Yielding and borne I knew not where,
But feeling resistance unavailing.

And thus, unnoticed and apart,
And more by accident than choice,
I listened to that single voice
Until the chambers of my heart
Were filled with it by night and day.
One night,--it was a night in May,--
Within the garden, unawares,
Under the blossoms in the gloom,
I heard it utter my own name
With protestations and wild prayers;
And it rang through me, and became
Like the archangel's trump of doom,
Which the soul hears, and must obey;
And mine arose as from a tomb.
My former life now seemed to me
Such as hereafter death may be,
When in the great Eternity
We shall awake and find it day.

It was a dream, and would not stay;
A dream, that in a single night
Faded and vanished out of sight.
My father's anger followed fast
This passion, as a freshening blast
Seeks out and fans the fire, whose rage
It may increase, but not assuage.
And he exclaimed: "No wandering bard
Shall win thy hand, O Irmingard!
For which Prince Henry of Hoheneck
By messenger and letter sues."

Gently, but firmly, I replied:
"Henry of Hoheneck I discard!
Never the hand of Irmingard
Shall lie in his as the hand of a bride!
This said I, Walter, for thy sake
This said I, for I could not choose.
After a pause, my father spake
In that cold and deliberate tone
Which turns the hearer into stone,
And seems itself the act to be
That follows with such dread certainty
"This or the cloister and the veil!"
No other words than these he said,
But they were like a funeral wail;
My life was ended, my heart was dead.

That night from the castle-gate went down
With silent, slow, and stealthy pace,
Two shadows, mounted on shadowy steeds,
Taking the narrow path that leads
Into the forest dense and brown.
In the leafy darkness of the place,
One could not distinguish form nor face,
Only a bulk without a shape,
A darker shadow in the shade;
One scarce could say it moved or stayed.
Thus it was we made our escape!
A foaming brook, with many a bound,
Followed us like a playful hound;
Then leaped before us, and in the hollow
Paused, and waited for us to follow,
And seemed impatient, and afraid
That our tardy flight should be betrayed
By the sound our horses' hoof-beats made.
And when we reached the plain below,
We paused a moment and drew rein
To look back at the castle again;
And we saw the windows all aglow
With lights, that were passing to and fro;
Our hearts with terror ceased to beat;
The brook crept silent to our feet;
We knew what most we feared to know.
Then suddenly horns began to blow;
And we heard a shout, and a heavy tramp,
And our horses snorted in the damp
Night-air of the meadows green and wide,
And in a moment, side by side,
So close, they must have seemed but one,
The shadows across the moonlight run,
And another came, and swept behind,
Like the shadow of clouds before the wind!

How I remember that breathless flight
Across the moors, in the summer night!
How under our feet the long, white road
Backward like a river flowed,
Sweeping with it fences and hedges,
Whilst farther away and overhead,
Paler than I, with fear and dread,
The moon fled with us as we fled
Along the forest's jagged edges!

All this I can remember well;
But of what afterwards befell
I nothing further can recall
Than a blind, desperate, headlong fall;
The rest is a blank and darkness all.
When I awoke out of this swoon,
The sun was shining, not the moon,
Making a cross upon the wall
With the bars of my windows narrow and tall;
And I prayed to it, as I had been wont to pray
From early childhood, day by day,
Each morning, as in bed I lay!
I was lying again in my own room!
And I thanked God, in my fever and pain,
That those shadows on the midnight plain
Were gone, and could not come again!
I struggled no longer with my doom!

This happened many years ago.
I left my father's home to come
Like Catherine to her martyrdom,
For blindly I esteemed it so.
And when I heard the convent door
Behind me close, to ope no more,
I felt it smite me like a blow.
Through all my limbs a shudder ran,
And on my bruised spirit fell
The dampness of my narrow cell
As night-air on a wounded man,
Giving intolerable pain.

But now a better life began.
I felt the agony decrease
By slow degrees, then wholly cease,
Ending in perfect rest and peace!
It was not apathy, nor dulness,
That weighed and pressed upon my brain,
But the same passion I had given
To earth before, now turned to heaven
With all its overflowing fulness.

Alas! the world is full of peril!
The path that runs through the fairest meads,
On the sunniest side of the valley, leads
Into a region bleak and sterile!
Alike in the high-born and the lowly,
The will is feeble, and passion strong.
We cannot sever right from wrong;
Some falsehood mingles with all truth;
Nor is it strange the heart of youth
Should waver and comprehend but slowly
The things that are holy and unholy!
But in this sacred, calm retreat,
We are all well and safely shielded
From winds that blow, and waves that beat,
From the cold, and rain, and blighting heat,
To which the strongest hearts have yielded.
Here we stand as the Virgins Seven,
For our celestial bridegroom yearning;
Our hearts are lamps forever burning,
With a steady and unwavering flame,
Pointing upward, forever the same,
Steadily upward toward the heaven!

The moon is hidden behind a cloud;
A sudden darkness fills the room,
And thy deep eyes, amid the gloom,
Shine like jewels in a shroud.
On the leaves is a sound of falling rain;
A bird, awakened in its nest,
Gives a faint twitter of unrest,
Then smooths its plumes and sleeps again.
No other sounds than these I hear;
The hour of midnight must be near.
Thou art o'erspent with the day's fatigue
Of riding many a dusty league;
Sink, then, gently to thy slumber;
Me so many cares encumber,
So many ghosts, and forms of fright,
Have started from their graves to-night,
They have driven sleep from mine eyes away:
I will go down to the chapel and pray.


V.

A COVERED BRIDGE AT LUCERNE

PRINCE HENRY.
God's blessing on the architects who build
The bridges o'er swift rivers and abysses
Before impassable to human feet,
No less than on the builders of cathedrals,
Whose massive walls are bridges thrown across
The dark and terrible abyss of Death.
Well has the name of Pontifex been given
Unto the Church's head, as the chief builder
And architect of the invisible bridge
That leads from earth to heaven.

ELSIE.
                  How dark it grows!
What are these paintings on the walls around us?

PRINCE HENRY.
The Dance Macaber!

ELSIE.
              What?

PRINCE HENRY.
               The Dance of Death!
All that go to and fro must look upon it,
Mindful of what they shall be, while beneath,
Among the wooden piles, the turbulent river
Rushes, impetuous as the river of life,
With dimpling eddies, ever green and bright,
Save where the shadow of this bridge falls on it.

ELSIE.
Oh yes!  I see it now!

PRINCE HENRY.
                     The grim musician
Leads all men through the mazes of that dance,
To different sounds in different measures moving;
Sometimes he plays a lute, sometimes a drum,
To tempt or terrify.

ELSIE.
                   What is this picture?

PRINCE HENRY.
It is a young man singing to a nun,
Who kneels at her devotions, but in kneeling
Turns round to look at him; and Death, meanwhile,
Is putting out the candles on the altar!

ELSIE.
Ah, what a pity 't is that she should listen
Unto such songs, when in her orisons
She might have heard in heaven the angels singing!

PRINCE HENRY.
Here he has stolen a jester's cap and bells
And dances with the Queen.

ELSIE.
                       A foolish jest!

PRINCE HENRY.
And here the heart of the new-wedded wife,
Coming from church with her beloved lord,
He startles with the rattle of his drum.

ELSIE.
Ah, that is sad!  And yet perhaps 't is best
That she should die, with all the sunshine on her,
And all the benedictions of the morning,
Before this affluence of golden light
Shall fade into a cold and clouded gray,
Then into darkness!

PRINCE HENRY.
                   Under it is written,
"Nothing but death shall separate thee and me!"

ELSIE.
And what is this, that follows close upon it?

PRINCE HENRY.
Death playing on a dulcimer.  Behind him,
A poor old woman, with a rosary,
Follows the sound, and seems to wish her feet
Were swifter to o'ertake him.  Underneath,
The inscription reads, "Better is Death than Life."

ELSIE.
Better is Death than Life!  Ah yes! to thousands
Death plays upon a dulcimer, and sings
That song of consolation, till the air
Rings with it, and they cannot choose but follow
Whither he leads.  And not the old alone,
But the young also hear it, and are still.

PRINCE HENRY.
Yes, in their sadder moments.  'T is the sound
Of their own hearts they hear, half full of tears,
Which are like crystal cups, half filled with water,
Responding to the pressure of a finger
With music sweet and low and melancholy.
Let us go forward, and no longer stay
In this great picture-gallery of Death!
I hate it! ay, the very thought of it!

ELSIE.
Why is it hateful to you?

PRINCE HENRY.
                        For the reason
That life, and all that speaks of life, is lovely,
And death, and all that speaks of death, is hateful.

ELSIE.
The grave itself is but a covered bridge,
Leading from light to light, through a brief darkness!

PRINCE HENRY, emerging from the bridge.
I breathe again more freely!  Ah, how pleasant
To come once more into the light of day,
Out of that shadow of death!  To hear again
The hoof-beats of our horses on firm ground,
And not upon those hollow planks, resounding
With a sepulchral echo, like the clods
On coffins in a churchyard!  Yonder lies
The Lake of the Four Forest-Towns, apparelled
In light, and lingering, like a village maiden,
Hid in the bosom of her native mountains
Then pouring all her life into another's,
Changing her name and being!  Overhead,
Shaking his cloudy tresses loose in air,
Rises Pilatus, with his windy pines.

They pass on.


THE DEVIL'S BRIDGE

PRINCE HENRY and ELSIE crossing with attendants.

GUIDE.
This bridge is called the Devil's Bridge.
With a single arch, from ridge to ridge,
It leaps across the terrible chasm
Yawning beneath us, black and deep,
As if, in some convulsive spasm,
The summits of the hills had cracked,
And made a road for the cataract
That raves and rages down the steep!

LUCIFER, under the bridge.
Ha! ha!

GUIDE.
Never any bridge but this
Could stand across the wild abyss;
All the rest, of wood or stone,
By the Devil's hand were overthrown.
He toppled crags from the precipice,
And whatsoe'er was built by day
In the night was swept away;
None could stand but this alone.

LUCIFER, under the bridge.
Ha! ha!

GUIDE.
I showed you in the valley a bowlder
Marked with the imprint of his shoulder;
As he was bearing it up this way,
A peasant, passing, cried, "Herr Je!
And the Devil dropped it in his fright,
And vanished suddenly out of sight!

LUCIFER, under the bridge.
Ha! ha!

GUIDE.
Abbot Giraldus of Einsiedel,
For pilgrims on their way to Rome,
Built this at last, with a single arch,
Under which, on its endless march,
Runs the river, white with foam,
Like a thread through the eye of a needle.
And the Devil promised to let it stand,
Under compact and condition
That the first living thing which crossed
Should be surrendered into his hand,
And be beyond redemption lost.

LUCIFER, under the bridge.
Ha! ha! perdition!

GUIDE.
At length, the bridge being all completed,
The Abbot, standing at its head,
Threw across it a loaf of bread,
Which a hungry dog sprang after;
And the rocks re-echoed with the peals of laughter,
To see the Devil thus defeated!

They pass on.

LUCIFER, under the bridge.
Ha! ha! defeated!
For journeys and for crimes like this
I let the bridge stand o'er the abyss!


THE ST. GOTHARD PASS

PRINCE HENRY.
This is the highest point.  Two ways the rivers
Leap down to different seas, and as they roll
Grow deep and still, and their majestic presence
Becomes a benefaction to the towns
They visit, wandering silently among them,
Like patriarchs old among their shining tents.

ELSIE.
How bleak and bare it is!  Nothing but mosses
Grow on these rocks.

PRINCE HENRY.
           Yet are they not forgotten;
Beneficent Nature sends the mists to feed them.

ELSIE.
See yonder little cloud, that, borne aloft
So tenderly by the wind, floats fast away
Over the snowy peaks!  It seems to me
The body of St. Catherine, borne by angels!

PRINCE HENRY.
Thou art St. Catherine, and invisible angels
Bear thee across these chasms and precipices,
Lest thou shouldst dash thy feet against a stone!

ELSIE.
Would I were borne unto my grave, as she was,
Upon angelic shoulders!  Even now
I seem uplifted by them, light as air!
What sound is that?

PRINCE HENRY.
             The tumbling avalanches!

ELSIE.
How awful, yet how beautiful!

PRINCE HENRY.
                           These are
The voices of the mountains!  Thus they ope
Their snowy lips, and speak unto each other,
In the primeval language, lost to man.

ELSIE.
What land is this that spreads itself beneath us?

PRINCE HENRY.
Italy! Italy!

ELSIE.
              Land of the Madonna!
How beautiful it is!  It seems a garden
Of Paradise!

PRINCE HENRY.
             Nay, of Gethsemane
To thee and me, of passion and of prayer!
Yet once of Paradise.  Long years ago
I wandered as a youth among its bowers,
And never from my heart has faded quite
Its memory, that, like a summer sunset,
Encircles with a ring of purple light
All the horizon of my youth.

GUIDE.
                           O friends!
The days are short, the way before us long:
We must not linger, if we think to reach
The inn at Belinzona before vespers!

They pass on.


AT THE FOOT OF THE ALPS

A halt under the trees at noon.

PRINCE HENRY.
Here let us pause a moment in the trembling
Shadow and sunshine of the roadside trees,
And, our tired horses in a group assembling,
Inhale long draughts of this delicious breeze.
Our fleeter steeds have distanced our attendants;
They lag behind us with a slower pace;
We will await them under the green pendants
Of the great willows in this shady place.
Ho, Barbarossa! how thy mottled haunches
Sweat with this canter over hill and glade!
Stand still, and let these overhanging branches
Fan thy hot sides and comfort thee with shade!

ELSIE.
What a delightful landscape spreads before us,
Marked with a whitewashed cottage here and there!
And, in luxuriant garlands drooping o'er us,
Blossoms of grape-vines scent the sunny air.

PRINCE HENRY.
Hark! what sweet sounds are those, whose accents holy
Fill the warm noon with music sad and sweet!

ELSIE.
It is a band of pilgrims, moving slowly
On their long journey, with uncovered feet.

PILGRIMS, chanting the Hymn of St. Hildebert.
  Me receptet Sion illa,
  Sion David, urbs tranquilla,
  Cujus faber auctor lucis,
  Cujus portae lignum crucis,
  Cujus claves lingua Petri,
  Cujus cives semper laeti,
  Cujus muri lapis vivus,
  Cujus custos rex festivus!

LUCIFER, as a Friar in the procession.
Here am I, too, in the pious band,
In the garb of a barefooted Carmelite dressed!
The soles of my feet are as hard and tanned
As the conscience of old Pope Hildebrand,
The Holy Satan, who made the wives
Of the bishops lead such shameful lives,
All day long I beat my breast,
And chant with a most particular zest
The Latin hymns, which I understand
Quite as well, I think, as the rest.
And at night such lodging in barns and sheds,
Such a hurly-burly in country inns,
Such a clatter of tongues in empty heads,
Such a helter-skelter of prayers and sins!
Of all the contrivances of the time
For sowing broadcast the seeds of crime,
There is none so pleasing to me and mine
As a pilgrimage to some far-off shrine!

PRINCE HENRY.
If from the outward man we judge the inner,
And cleanliness is godliness, I fear
A hopeless reprobate, a hardened Sinner,
Must be that Carmelite now passing near.

LUCIFER.
There is my German Prince again,
Thus far on his journey to Salern,
And the lovesick girl, whose heated brain
Is sowing the cloud to reap the rain;
But it's a long road that has no turn!
Let them quietly hold their way,
I have also a part in the play.
But first I must act to my heart's content
This mummery and this merriment,
And drive this motley flock of sheep
Into the fold, where drink and sleep
The jolly old friars of Benevent.
Of a truth, it often provokes me to laugh
To see these beggars hobble along,
Lamed and maimed, and fed upon chaff,
Chanting their wonderful puff and paff,
And, to make up for not understanding the song,
Singing it fiercely, and wild, and strong!
Were it not for my magic garters and staff,
And the goblets of goodly wine I quaff,
And the mischief I make in the idle throng,
I should not continue the business long.

PILGRIMS, chanting.
  In hac urbe, lux solennis,
  Ver aeternum, pax perennis;
  In hac odor implens caelos,
  In hac semper festum melos!

PRINCE HENRY.
Do you observe that monk among the train,
Who pours from his great throat the roaring bass,
As a cathedral spout pours out the rain,
And this way turns his rubicund, round face?

ELSIE.
It is the same who, on the Strasburg square,
Preached to the people in the open air.

PRINCE HENRY.
And he has crossed o'er mountain, field, and fell,
On that good steed, that seems to bear him well,
The hackney of the Friars of Orders Gray,
His own stout legs!  He, too, was in the play,
Both as King Herod and Ben Israel.
Good morrow, Friar!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
             Good morrow, noble Sir!

PRINCE HENRY.
I speak in German, for, unless I err,
You are a German.

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
                I cannot gainsay you.
But by what instinct, or what secret sign,
Meeting me here, do you straightway divine
That northward of the Alps my country lies?

PRINCE HENRY.
Your accent, like St. Peter's, would betray you,
Did not your yellow beard and your blue eyes.
Moreover, we have seen your face before,
And heard you preach at the Cathedral door
On Easter Sunday, in the Strasburg square.
We were among the crowd that gathered there,
And saw you play the Rabbi with great skill,
As if, by leaning o'er so many years
To walk with little children, your own will
Had caught a childish attitude from theirs,
A kind of stooping in its form and gait,
And could no longer stand erect and straight.
Whence come you now?

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
             From the old monastery
Of Hirschau, in the forest; being sent
Upon a pilgrimage to Benevent,
To see the image of the Virgin Mary,
That moves its holy eyes, and sometimes speaks,
And lets the piteous tears run down its cheeks,
To touch the hearts of the impenitent.

PRINCE HENRY.
Oh, had I faith, as in the days gone by,
That knew no doubt, and feared no mystery!

LUCIFER, at a distance.
Ho, Cuthbert!  Friar Cuthbert!

FRIAR CUTHBERT.
                     Fare well, Prince;
I cannot stay to argue and convince.

PRINCE HENRY.
This is indeed the blessed Mary's land,
Virgin and mother of our dear redeemer!
All hearts are touched and softened at her name,
Alike the bandit, with the bloody hand,
The priest, the prince, the scholar, and the peasant,
The man of deeds, the visionary dreamer,
Pay homage to her as one ever present!
And even as children, who have much offended
A too indulgent father, in great shame,
Penitent, and yet not daring unattended
To go into his presence, at the gate
Speak with their sister, and confiding wait
Till she goes in before and intercedes;
So men, repenting of their evil deeds,
And yet not venturing rashly to draw near
With their requests an angry father's ear,
Offer to her their prayers and their confession,
And she for them in heaven makes intercession.
And if our faith had given us nothing more
Than this example of all womanhood,
So mild, so merciful, so strong, so good,
So patient, peaceful, loyal, loving, pure,
This were enough to prove it higher and truer
Than all the creeds the world had known before.

PILGRIMS, chanting afar off.
  Urbs coelestis, urbs beata,
  Supra petram collocata,
  Urbs in portu satis tuto
  De longinquo te saluto,
  Te saluto, te suspiro,
  Te affecto, te requiro!


THE INN AT GENOA

A terrace overlooking the sea.  Night.

PRINCE HENRY.
It is the sea, it is the sea,
In all its vague immensity,
Fading and darkening in the distance!
Silent, majestical, and slow,
The white ships haunt it to and fro,
With all their ghostly sails unfurled,
As phantoms from another world
Haunt the dim confines of existence!
But ah! how few can comprehend
Their signals, or to what good end
From land to land they come and go!
Upon a sea more vast and dark
The spirits of the dead embark,
All voyaging to unknown coasts.
We wave our farewells from the shore,
And they depart, and come no more,
Or come as phantoms and as ghosts.

Above the darksome sea of death
Looms the great life that is to be,
A land of cloud and mystery,
A dim mirage, with shapes of men
Long dead and passed beyond our ken,
Awe-struck we gaze, and hold our breath
Till the fair pageant vanisheth,
Leaving us in perplexity,
And doubtful whether it has been
A vision of the world unseen,
Or a bright image of our own
Against the sky in vapors thrown.

LUCIFER, singing from the sea.
Thou didst not make it, thou canst not mend it,
But thou hast the power to end it!
The sea is silent, the sea is discreet,
Deep it lies at thy very feet;
There is no confessor like unto Death!
Thou canst not see him, but he is near;
Thou needst not whisper above thy breath,
And he will hear;
He will answer the questions,
The vague surmises and suggestions,
That fill thy soul with doubt and fear!

PRINCE HENRY.
The fisherman, who lies afloat,
With shadowy sail, in yonder boat,
Is singing softly to the Night!
But do I comprehend aright
The meaning of the words he sung
So sweetly in his native tongue?
Ah yes! the sea is still and deep.
All things within its bosom sleep!
A single step, and all is o'er;
A plunge, a bubble an no more;
And thou, dear Elsie, wilt be free
From martyrdom and agony.

ELSIE, coming from her chamber upon the terrace.
The night is calm and cloudless,
And still as still can be,
And the stars come forth to listen
To the music of the sea.
They gather, and gather, and gather,
Until they crowd the sky,
And listen, in breathless silence,
To the solemn litany.
It begins in rocky caverns,
As a voice that chants alone
To the pedals of the organ
In monotonous undertone;
And anon from shelving beaches,
And shallow sands beyond,
In snow-white robes uprising
The ghostly choirs respond.
And sadly and unceasing
The mournful voice sings on,
And the snow-white choirs still answer
Christe eleison!

PRINCE HENRY.
Angel of God! thy finer sense perceives
Celestial and perpetual harmonies!
Thy purer soul, that trembles and believes,
Hears the archangel's trumpet in the breeze,
And where the forest rolls, or ocean heaves,
Cecilia's organ sounding in the seas,
And tongues of prophets speaking in the leaves.
But I hear discord only and despair,
And whispers as of demons in the air!


AT SEA

IL PADRONE.
The wind upon our quarter lies,
And on before the freshening gale,
That fills the snow-white lateen sail,
Swiftly our light felucca flies,
Around the billows burst and foam;
They lift her o'er the sunken rock,
They beat her sides with many a shock,
And then upon their flowing dome
They poise her, like a weathercock!
Between us and the western skies
The hills of Corsica arise;
Eastward in yonder long blue line,
The summits of the Apennine,
And southward, and still far away,
Salerno, on its sunny bay.
You cannot see it, where it lies.

PRINCE HENRY.
Ah, would that never more mine eyes
Might see its towers by night or day!

ELSIE.
Behind us, dark and awfully,
There comes a cloud out of the sea,
That bears the form of a hunted deer,
With hide of brown, and hoofs of black
And antlers laid upon its back,
And fleeing fast and wild with fear,
As if the hounds were on its track!

PRINCE HENRY.
Lo! while we gaze, it breaks and falls
In shapeless masses, like the walls
Of a burnt city.  Broad and red
The flies of the descending sun
Glare through the windows, and o'erhead,
Athwart the vapors, dense and dun,
Long shafts of silvery light arise,
Like rafters that support the skies!

ELSIE.
See! from its summit the lurid levin
Flashes downward without warning,
As Lucifer, son of the morning,
Fell from the battlements of heaven!

IL PADRONE.
I must entreat you, friends, below!
The angry storm begins to blow,
For the weather changes with the moon.
All this morning, until noon,
We had baffling winds, and sudden flaws
Struck the sea with their cat's-paws.
Only a little hour ago
I was whistling to Saint Antonio
For a capful of wind to fill our sail,
And instead of a breeze he has sent a gale.
Last night I saw St. Elmo's stars,
With their glimmering lanterns, all at play
On the tops of the masts and the tips of the spars,
And I knew we should have foul weather to-day.
Cheerily, my hearties! yo heave ho!
Brail up the mainsail, and let her go
As the winds will and Saint Antonio!

Do you see that Livornese felucca,
That vessel to the windward yonder,
Running with her gunwale under?
I was looking when the wind o'ertook her,
She had all sail set, and the only wonder
Is that at once the strength of the blast
Did not carry away her mast.
She is a galley of the Gran Duca,
That, through the fear of the Algerines,
Convoys those lazy brigantines,
Laden with wine and oil from Lucca.
Now all is ready, high and low;
Blow, blow, good Saint Antonio!

Ha! that is the first dash of the rain,
With a sprinkle of spray above the rails,
Just enough to moisten our sails,
And make them ready for the strain.
See how she leaps, as the blasts o'ertake her,
And speeds away with a bone in her mouth!
Now keep her head toward the south,
And there is no danger of bank or breaker.
With the breeze behind us, on we go;
Not too much, good Saint Antonio!


VI

THE SCHOOL OF SALERNO

A travelling Scholastic affixing his Theses to the gate of the
College.

SCHOLASTIC.
There, that is my gauntlet, my banner, my shield,
Hung up as a challenge to all the field!
One hundred and twenty-five propositions,
Which I will maintain with the sword of the tongue
Against all disputants, old and young.
Let us see if doctors or dialecticians
Will dare to dispute my definitions,
Or attack any one of my learned theses.
Here stand I; the end shall be as God pleases.
I think I have proved, by profound researches,
The error of all those doctrines so vicious
Of the old Areopagite Dionysius,
That are making such terrible work in the churches,
By Michael the Stammerer sent from the East,
And done into Latin by that Scottish beast,
Johannes Duns Scotus, who dares to maintain,
In the face of the truth, the error infernal,
That the universe is and must be eternal;
At first laying down, as a fact fundamental,
That nothing with God can be accidental;
Then asserting that God before the creation
Could not have existed, because it is plain
That, had He existed, He would have created;
Which is begging the question that should be debated,
And moveth me less to anger than laughter.
All nature, he holds, is a respiration
Of the Spirit of God, who, in breathing, hereafter
Will inhale it into his bosom again,
So that nothing but God alone will remain.
And therein he contradicteth himself;
For he opens the whole discussion by stating,
That God can only exist in creating.
That question I think I have laid on the shelf!

He goes out.  Two Doctors come in disputing, and followed by
pupils.

DOCTOR SERAFINO.
I, with the Doctor Seraphic, maintain,
That a word which is only conceived in the brain
Is a type of eternal Generation;
The spoken word is the Incarnation.

DOCTOR CHERUBINO.
What do I care for the Doctor Seraphic,
With all his wordy chaffer and traffic?

DOCTOR SERAFINO.
You make but a paltry show of resistance;
Universals have no real existence!

DOCTOR CHERUBINO.
Your words are but idle and empty chatter;
Ideas are eternally joined to matter!

DOCTOR SERAFINO.
May the Lord have mercy on your position,
You wretched, wrangling culler of herbs!

DOCTOR CHERUBINO.
May he send your soul to eternal perdition,
For your Treatise on the Irregular verbs!

They rush out fighting.  Two Scholars come in.

FIRST SCHOLAR.
Monte Cassino, then, is your College.
What think you of ours here at Salern?

SECOND SCHOLAR.
To tell the truth, I arrived so lately,
I hardly yet have had time to discern.
So much, at least, I am bound to acknowledge:
The air seems healthy, the buildings stately,
And on the whole I like it greatly.

FIRST SCHOLAR.
Yes, the air is sweet; the Calabrian hills
Send us down puffs of mountain air;
And in summer-time the sea-breeze fills
With its coolness cloister, and court, and square.
Then at every season of the year
There are crowds of guests and travellers here;
Pilgrims, and mendicant friars, and traders
From the Levant, with figs and wine,
And bands of wounded and sick Crusaders,
Coming back from Palestine.

SECOND SCHOLAR.
And what are the studies you pursue?
What is the course you here go through?

FIRST SCHOLAR.
The first three years of the college course
Are given to Logic alone, as the source
Of all that is noble, and wise, and true.

SECOND SCHOLAR.
That seems rather strange, I must confess,
In a Medical School; yet, nevertheless,
You doubtless have reasons for that.

FIRST SCHOLAR.
                               Oh yes
For none but a clever dialectician
Can hope to become a great physician;
That has been settled long ago.
Logic makes an important part
Of the mystery of the healing art;
For without it how could you hope to show
That nobody knows so much as you know?
After this there are five years more
Devoted wholly to medicine,
With lectures on chirurgical lore,
And dissections of the bodies of swine,
As likest the human form divine.

SECOND SCHOLAR.
What are the books now most in vogue?

FIRST SCHOLAR.
Quite an extensive catalogue;
Mostly, however, books of our own;
As Gariopontus' Passionarius,
And the writings of Matthew Platearius;
And a volume universally known
As the Regimen of the School of Salern,
For Robert of Normandy written in terse
And very elegant Latin verse.
Each of these writings has its turn.
And when at length we have finished these
Then comes the struggle for degrees,
Will all the oldest and ablest critics;
The public thesis and disputation,
Question, and answer, and explanation
Of a passage out of Hippocrates,
Or Aristotle's Analytics.
There the triumphant Magister stands!
A book is solemnly placed in his hands,
On which he swears to follow the rule
And ancient forms of the good old School;
To report if any confectionarius
Mingles his drugs with matters various,
And to visit his patients twice a day,
And once in the night, if they live in town,
And if they are poor, to take no pay.
Having faithfully promised these,
His head is crowned with a laurel crown;
A kiss on his cheek, a ring on his hand,
The Magister Artium et Physices
Goes forth from the school like a lord of the land.
And now, as we have the whole morning before us,
Let us go in, if you make no objection,
And listen awhile to a learned prelection
On Marcus Aurelius Cassioderus.

They go in.  Enter Lucifer as a Doctor.

LUCIFER.
This is the great School of Salern!
A land of wrangling and of quarrels,
Of brains that seethe, and hearts that burn,
Where every emulous scholar hears,
In every breath that comes to his ears,
The rustling of another's laurels!
The air of the place is called salubrious;
The neighborhood of Vesuvius lends it
Au odor volcanic, that rather mends it,
And the building's have an aspect lugubrious,
That inspires a feeling of awe and terror
Into the heart of the beholder.
And befits such an ancient homestead of error,
Where the old falsehoods moulder and smoulder,
And yearly by many hundred hands
Are carried away in the zeal of youth,
And sown like tares in the field of truth,
To blossom and ripen in other lands.

What have we here, affixed to the gate?
The challenge of some scholastic wight,
Who wishes to hold a public debate
On sundry questions wrong or right!
Ah, now this is my great delight!
For I have often observed of late
That such discussions end in a fight.
Let us see what the learned wag maintains
With such a prodigal waste of brains.

Reads.

"Whether angels in moving from place to place
Pass through the intermediate space.
Whether God himself is the author of evil,
Or whether that is the work of the Devil.
When, where, and wherefore Lucifer fell,
And whether he now is chained in hell."
I think I can answer that question well!
So long as the boastful human mind
Consents in such mills as this to grind,
I sit very firmly upon my throne!
Of a truth it almost makes me laugh,
To see men leaving the golden grain
To gather in piles the pitiful chaff
That old Peter Lombard thrashed with his brain,
To have it caught up and tossed again
On the horns of the Dumb Ox of Cologne!

But my guests approach! there is in the air
A fragrance, like that of the Beautiful Garden
Of Paradise, in the days that were!
An odor of innocence and of prayer,
And of love, and faith that never fails,
Such as the fresh young heart exhales
Before it begins to wither and harden!
I cannot breathe such an atmosphere!
My soul is filled with a nameless fear,
That after all my trouble and pain,
After all my restless endeavor,
The youngest, fairest soul of the twain,
The most ethereal, most divine,
Will escape from my hands for ever and ever.
But the other is already mine!
Let him live to corrupt his race,
Breathing among them, with every breath,
Weakness, selfishness, and the base
And pusillanimous fear of death.
I know his nature, and I know
That of all who in my ministry
Wander the great earth to and fro,
And on my errands come and go,
The safest and subtlest are such as he.

Enter PRINCE HENRY and ELSIE, with attendants.

PRINCE HENRY.
Can you direct us to Friar Angelo?

LUCIFER.
He stands before you.

PRINCE HENRY.
          Then you know our purpose.
I am Prince Henry of Hoheneck, and this
The maiden that I spake of in my letters.

LUCIFER.
It is a very grave and solemn business!
We must nor be precipitate.  Does she
Without compulsion, of her own free will,
Consent to this?

PRINCE HENRY.
                 Against all opposition,
Against all prayers, entreaties, protestations,
She will not be persuaded.

LUCIFER.
                       That is strange!
Have you thought well of it?

ELSIE.
                      I come not here
To argue, but to die.  Your business is not
To question, but to kill me.  I am ready,
I am impatient to be gone from here
Ere any thoughts of earth disturb again
The spirit of tranquillity within me.

PRINCE HENRY.
Would I had not come here!  Would I were dead,
And thou wert in thy cottage in the forest,
And hadst not known me!  Why have I done this?
Let me go back and die.

ELSIE.
                        It cannot be;
Not if these cold, flat stones on which we tread
Were coulters heated white, and yonder gateway
Flamed like a furnace with a sevenfold heat.
I must fulfil my purpose.

PRINCE HENRY.
                        I forbid it!
Not one step further.  For I only meant
To put thus far thy courage to the proof.
It is enough.  I, too, have strength to die,
For thou hast taught me!

ELSIE.
              O my Prince! remember
Your promises.  Let me fulfil my errand.
You do not look on life and death as I do.
There are two angels, that attend unseen
Each one of us, and in great books record
Our good and evil deeds.  He who writes down
The good ones, after every action closes
His volume, and ascends with it to God.
The other keeps his dreadful day-book open
Till sunset, that we may repent; which doing,
The record of the action fades away,
And leaves a line of white across the page.
Now if my act be good, as I believe,
It cannot be recalled.  It is already
Sealed up in heaven, as a good deed accomplished.
The rest is yours.  Why wait you?  I am ready.

To her attendants.
Weep not, my friends! rather rejoice with me.
I shall not feel the pain, but shall be gone,
And you will have another friend in heaven.
Then start not at the creaking of the door
Through which I pass.  I see what lies beyond it.

To PRINCE HENRY.
And you, O Prince! bear back my benison
Unto my father's house, and all within it.
This morning in the church I prayed for them,
After confession, after absolution,
When my whole soul was white, I prayed for them.
God will take care of them, they need me not.
And in your life let my remembrance linger,
As something not to trouble and disturb it,
But to complete it, adding life to life.
And if at times beside the evening fire,
You see my face among the other faces,
Let it not be regarded as a ghost
That haunts your house, but as a guest that loves you.
Nay, even as one of your own family,
Without whose presence there were something wanting.
I have no more to say.  Let us go in.

PRINCE HENRY.
Friar Angelo!  I charge you on your life,
Believe not what she says, for she is mad,
And comes here not to die, but to be healed.

ELSIE.
Alas! Prince Henry!

LUCIFER.
             Come with me; this way.

ELSIE goes in with LUCIFER, who thrusts PRINCE HENRY back and
closes the door.

PRINCE HENRY.
Gone! and the light of all my life gone with her!
A sudden darkness falls upon the world!
Oh, what a vile and abject thing am I
That purchase length of days at such a cost!
Not by her death alone, but by the death
Of all that's good and true and noble in me
All manhood, excellence, and self-respect,
All love, and faith, and hope, and heart are dead!
All my divine nobility of nature
By this one act is forfeited forever.
I am a Prince in nothing but in name!

To the attendants.
Why did you let this horrible deed be done?
Why did you not lay hold on her, and keep her
From self destruction?  Angelo! murderer!

Struggles at the door, but cannot open it.

ELSIE, within.
Farewell, dear Prince! farewell!

PRINCE HENRY.
                      Unbar the door!

LUCIFER.
It is too late!

PRINCE HENRY.
          It shall not be too late.

They burst the door open and rush in.


THE FARM-HOUSE IN THE ODENWALD

URSULA spinning.  A summer afternoon.  A table spread.

URSULA.
I have marked it well,--it must be true,--
Death never takes one alone, but two!
Whenever he enters in at a door,
Under roof of gold or roof of thatch,
He always leaves it upon the latch,
And comes again ere the year is o'er.
Never one of a household only!
Perhaps it is a mercy of God,
Lest the dead there under the sod,
In the land of strangers, should be lonely!
Ah me! I think I am lonelier here!
It is hard to go,--but harder to stay!
Were it not for the children, I should pray
That Death would take me within the year!
And Gottlieb!--he is at work all day,
In the sunny field, or the forest murk,
But I know that his thoughts are far away,
I know that his heart is not in his work!
And when he comes home to me at night
He is not cheery, but sits and sighs,
And I see the great tears in his eyes,
And try to be cheerful for his sake.
Only the children's hearts are light.
Mine is weary, and ready to break.
God help us!  I hope we have done right;
We thought we were acting for the best!

Looking through the open door.

Who is it coming under the trees?
A man, in the Prince's livery dressed!
He looks about him with doubtful face,
As if uncertain of the place.
He stops at the beehives;--now he sees
The garden gate;--he is going past!
Can he be afraid of the bees?
No; he is coming in at last!
He fills my heart with strange alarm!

Enter a Forester.

FORESTER.
Is this the tenant Gottlieb's farm?

URSULA.
This is his farm, and I his wife.
Pray sit.  What may your business be?

FORESTER.
News from the Prince!

URSULA.
                    Of death or life?

FORESTER.
You put your questions eagerly!

URSULA.
Answer me, then!  How is the Prince?

FORESTER.
I left him only two hours since
Homeward returning down the river,
As strong and well as if God, the Giver,
Had given him back his youth again.

URSULA, despairing.
Then Elsie, my poor child, is dead!

FORESTER.
That, my good woman, I have not said.
Don't cross the bridge till you come to it,
Is a proverb old, and of excellent wit.

URSULA.
Keep me no longer in this pain!

FORESTER.
It is true your daughter is no more;--
That is, the peasant she was before.

URSULA.
Alas! I am simple and lowly bred,
I am poor, distracted, and forlorn.
And it is not well that you of the court
Should mock me thus, and make a sport
Of a joyless mother whose child is dead,
For you, too, were of mother born!

FORESTER.
Your daughter lives, and the Prince is well!
You will learn erelong how it all befell.
Her heart for a moment never failed;
But when they reached Salerno's gate,
The Prince's nobler self prevailed,
And saved her for a noble fate.
And he was healed, in his despair,
By the touch of St. Matthew's sacred bones;
Though I think the long ride in the open air,
That pilgrimage over stocks and stones,
In the miracle must come in for a share.

URSULA.
Virgin! who lovest the poor and lowly,
If the loud cry of a mother's heart
Can ever ascend to where thou art,
Into thy blessed hands and holy
Receive my prayer of praise and thanksgiving!
Let the hands that bore our Saviour bear it
Into the awful presence of God;
For thy feet with holiness are shod,
And if thou hearest it He will hear it.
Our child who was dead again is living!

FORESTER.
I did not tell you she was dead;
If you thought so 't was no fault of mine;
At this very moment while I speak,
They are sailing homeward down the Rhine,
In a splendid barge, with golden prow,
And decked with banners white and red
As the colors on your daughter's cheek.
They call her the Lady Alicia now;
For the Prince in Salerno made a vow
That Elsie only would he wed.

URSULA.
Jesu Maria! what a change!
All seems to me so weird and strange!

FORESTER.
I saw her standing on the deck,
Beneath an awning cool and shady;
Her cap of velvet could not hold
The tresses of her hair of gold,
That flowed and floated like the stream,
And fell in masses down her neck.
As fair and lovely did she seem
As in a story or a dream
Some beautiful and foreign lady.
And the Prince looked so grand and proud,
And waved his hand thus to the crowd
That gazed and shouted from the shore,
All down the river, long and loud.

URSULA.
We shall behold our child once more;
She is not dead!  She is not dead!
God, listening, must have overheard
The prayers, that, without sound or word,
Our hearts in secrecy have said!
Oh, bring me to her; for mine eyes
Are hungry to behold her face;
My very soul within me cries;
My very hands seem to caress her,
To see her, gaze at her, and bless her;
Dear Elsie, child of God and grace!

Goes out toward the garden.

FORESTER.
There goes the good woman out of her head;
And Gottlieb's supper is waiting here;
A very capacious flagon of beer,
And a very portentous loaf of bread.
One would say his grief did not much oppress him.
Here's to the health of the Prince, God bless him!

He drinks.

Ha! it buzzes and stings like a hornet!
And what a scene there, through the door!
The forest behind and the garden before,
And midway an old man of threescore,
With a wife and children that caress him.
Let me try still further to cheer and adorn it
With a merry, echoing blast of my cornet!

Goes out blowing his horn.


THE CASTLE OF VAUTSBERG ON THE RHINE

PRINCE HENRY and ELSIE standing on the terrace at evening.

The sound of tells heard from a distance.

PRINCE HENRY.
We are alone.  The wedding guests
Ride down the hill, with plumes and cloaks,
And the descending dark invests
The Niederwald, and all the nests
Among its hoar and haunted oaks.

ELSIE.
What bells are those, that ring so slow,
So mellow, musical, and low?

PRINCE HENRY.
They are the bells of Geisenheim,
That with their melancholy chime
Ring out the curfew of the sun.

ELSIE.
Listen, beloved.

PRINCE HENRY.
                  They are done!
Dear Elsie! many years ago
Those same soft bells at eventide
Rang in the ears of Charlemagne,
As, seated by Fastrada's side
At Ingelheim, in all his pride
He heard their sound with secret pain.

ELSIE.
Their voices only speak to me
Of peace and deep tranquillity,
And endless confidence in thee!

PRINCE HENRY.
Thou knowest the story of her ring,
How, when the court went back to Aix,
Fastrada died; and how the king
Sat watching by her night and day,
Till into one of the blue lakes,
Which water that delicious land,
They cast the ring, drawn from her hand:
And the great monarch sat serene
And sad beside the fated shore,
Nor left the land forevermore.

ELSIE.
That was true love.

PRINCE HENRY.
                    For him the queen
Ne'er did what thou hast done for me.

ELSIE.
Wilt thou as fond and faithful be?
Wilt thou so love me after death?

PRINCE HENRY.
In life's delight, in death's dismay,
In storm and sunshine, night and day,
In health, in sickness, in decay,
Here and hereafter, I am thine!
Thou hast Fastrada's ring.  Beneath
the calm, blue waters of thine eyes,
Deep in thy steadfast soul it lies,
And, undisturbed by this world's breath,
With magic light its jewels shine!
This golden ring, which thou hast worn
Upon thy finger since the morn,
Is but a symbol and a semblance,
An outward fashion, a remembrance,
Of what thou wearest within unseen,
O my Fastrada, O my queen!
Behold! the hill-trips all aglow
With purple and with amethyst;
While the whole valley deep below
Is filled, and seems to overflow,
With a fast-rising tide of mist.
The evening air grows damp and chill;
Let us go in.

ELSIE.
              Ah, not so soon.
See yonder fire!  It is the moon
Slow rising o'er the eastern hill.
It glimmers on the forest tips
And through the dewy foliage drips
In little rivulets of light,
And makes the heart in love with night.

PRINCE HENRY.
Oft on this terrace, when the day
Was closing, have I stood and gazed,
And seen the landscape fade away,
And the white vapors rise and drown
Hamlet and vineyard, tower and town,
While far above the hill-tops blazed.
But then another hand than thine
Was gently held and clasped in mine;
Another head upon my breast
Was laid, as thine is now, at rest.
Why dost thou lift those tender eyes
With so much sorrow and surprise?
A minstrel's, not a maiden's hand,
Was that which in my own was pressed,
A manly form usurped thy place,
A beautiful, but bearded face,
That now is in the Holy Land,
Yet in my memory from afar
Is shining on us like a star.
But linger not.  For while I speak,
A sheeted spectre white and tall,
The cold mist climbs the castle wall,
And lays his hand upon thy cheek!

They go in.



EPILOGUE

THE TWO RECORDING ANGELS ASCENDING

THE ANGEL OF GOOD DEEDS, with closed book.
God sent his messenger the rain,
And said unto the mountain brook,
"Rise up, and from thy caverns look
And leap, with naked, snow-white feet,
From the cool hills into the heat
Of the broad, arid plain.

God sent his messenger of faith,
And whispered in the maiden's heart,
"Rise up and look from where thou art,
And scatter with unselfish hands
Thy freshness on the barren sands
And solitudes of Death."

O beauty of holiness,
Of self-forgetfulness, of lowliness!
O power of meekness,
Whose very gentleness and weakness
Are like the yielding, but irresistible air!
Upon the pages
Of the sealed volume that I bear,
The deed divine
Is written in characters of gold,
That never shall grow old,
But through all ages
Burn and shine,
With soft effulgence!
O God! it is thy indulgence
That fills the world with the bliss
Of a good deed like this!

THE ANGEL OF EVIL DEEDS, with open book.
Not yet, not yet
Is the red sun wholly set,
But evermore recedes,
While open still I bear
The Book of Evil Deeds,
To let the breathings of the upper air
Visit its pages and erase
The records from its face!
Fainter and fainter as I gaze
In the broad blaze
The glimmering landscape shines,
And below me the black river
Is hidden by wreaths of vapor!
Fainter and fainter the black lines
Begin to quiver
Along the whitening surface of the paper;
Shade after shade
The terrible words grow faint and fade,
And in their place
Runs a white space!

Down goes the sun!
But the soul of one,
Who by repentance
hath escaped the dreadful sentence,
Shines bright below me as I look.
It is the end!
With closed Book
To God do I ascend.
Lo! over the mountain steeps
A dark, gigantic shadow sweeps
Beneath my feet;
A blackness inwardly brightening
With sullen heat,
As a storm-cloud lurid with lightning.
And a cry of lamentation,
Repeated and again repeated,
Deep and loud
As the reverberation
Of cloud answering unto cloud,
Swells and rolls away in the distance,
As if the sheeted
Lightning retreated.
Baffled and thwarted by the wind's resistance.

It is Lucifer,
The son of mystery;
And since God suffers him to be,
He, too, is God's minister.
And labors for some good
By us not understood!



SECOND INTERLUDE

MARTIN LUTHER


A CHAMBER IN THE WARTBURG.  MORNING.  MARTIN LUTHER WRITING.

MARTIN LUTHER.
  Our God, a Tower of Strength is He,
  A goodly wall and weapon;
  From all our need He helps us free,
  That now to us doth happen.
    The old evil foe
    Doth in earnest grow,
    In grim armor dight,
    Much guile and great might;
  On earth there is none like him.

Oh yes; a tower of strength indeed,
A present help in all our need,
A sword and buckler is our God.
Innocent men have walked unshod
O'er burning ploughshares, and have trod
Unharmed on serpents in their path,
And laughed to scorn the Devil's wrath!

Safe in this Wartburg tower I stand
Where God hath led me by the hand,
And look down, with a heart at ease,
Over the pleasant neighborhoods,
Over the vast Thuringian Woods,
With flash of river, and gloom of trees,
With castles crowning the dizzy heights,
And farms and pastoral delights,
And the morning pouring everywhere
Its golden glory on the air.
Safe, yes, safe am I here at last,
Safe from the overwhelming blast
Of the mouths of Hell, that followed me fast,
And the howling demons of despair
That hunted me like a beast to his lair.

  Of our own might we nothing can;
  We soon are unprotected:
  There fighteth for us the right Man,
  Whom God himself elected.
    Who is He; ye exclaim?
    Christus is his name,
    Lord of Sabaoth,
    Very God in troth;
  The field He holds forever.

Nothing can vex the Devil more
Than the name of him whom we adore.
Therefore doth it delight me best
To stand in the choir among the rest,
With the great organ trumpeting
Through its metallic tubes, and sing:
Et verbum caro factum est!
These words the devil cannot endure,
For he knoweth their meaning well!
Him they trouble and repel,
Us they comfort and allure,
And happy it were, if our delight
Were as great as his affright!

Yea, music is the Prophet's art;
Among the gifts that God hath sent,
One of the most magnificent!
It calms the agitated heart;
Temptations, evil thoughts, and all
The passions that disturb the soul,
Are quelled by its divine control,
As the evil spirit fled from Saul,
And his distemper was allayed,
When David took his harp and played.

  This world may full of Devils be,
  All ready to devour us;
  Yet not so sore afraid are we,
  They shall not overpower us.
    This World's Prince, howe'er
    Fierce he may appear,
    He can harm us not,
    He is doomed, God wot!
  One little word can slay him!

Incredible it seems to some
And to myself a mystery,
That such weak flesh and blood as we,
Armed with no other shield or sword,
Or other weapon than the Word,
Should combat and should overcome
A spirit powerful as he!
He summons forth the Pope of Rome
With all his diabolic crew,
His shorn and shaven retinue
Of priests and children of the dark;
Kill! kill! they cry, the Heresiarch,
Who rouseth up all Christendom
Against us; and at one fell blow
Seeks the whole Church to overthrow!
Not yet; my hour is not yet come.

Yesterday in an idle mood,
Hunting with others in the wood,
I did not pass the hours in vain,
For in the very heart of all
The joyous tumult raised around,
Shouting of men, and baying of hound,
And the bugle's blithe and cheery call,
And echoes answering back again,
From crags of the distant mountain chain,--
In the very heart of this, I found
A mystery of grief and pain.
It was an image of the power
Of Satan, hunting the world about,
With his nets and traps and well-trained dogs,
His bishops and priests and theologues,
And all the rest of the rabble rout,
Seeking whom he may devour!
Enough I have had of hunting hares,
Enough of these hours of idle mirth,
Enough of nets and traps and gins!
The only hunting of any worth
Is where I can pierce with javelins
The cunning foxes and wolves and bears,
The whole iniquitous troop of beasts,
The Roman Pope and the Roman priests
That sorely infest and afflict the earth!
Ye nuns, ye singing birds of the air!
The fowler hath caught you in his snare,
And keeps you safe in his gilded cage,
Singing the song that never tires,
To lure down others from their nests;
How ye flutter and heat your breasts,
Warm and soft with young desires,
Against the cruel, pitiless wires,
Reclaiming your lost heritage!
Behold! a hand unbars the door,
Ye shall be captives held no more.

  The Word they shall perforce let stand,
  And little thanks they merit!
  For He is with us in the land,
  With gifts of his own Spirit!
    Though they take our life,
    Goods, honors, child and wife,
    Lot these pass away,
    Little gain have they;
  The Kingdom still remaineth!

Yea, it remaineth forevermore,
However Satan may rage and roar,
Though often be whispers in my ears:
What if thy doctrines false should be?
And wrings from me a bitter sweat.
Then I put him to flight with jeers,
Saying: Saint Satan! pray for me;
If thou thinkest I am not saved yet!

And my mortal foes that lie in wait
In every avenue and gate!
As to that odious monk John Tetzel,
Hawking about his hollow wares
Like a huckster at village fairs,
And those mischievous fellows, Wetzel,
Campanus, Carlstadt, Martin Cellarius,
And all the busy, multifarious
Heretics, and disciples of Arius,
Half-learned, dunce-bold, dry and hard,
They are not worthy of my regard,
Poor and humble as I am.

But ah! Erasmus of Rotterdam,
He is the vilest miscreant
That ever walked this world below
A Momus, making his mock and mow,
At Papist and at Protestant,
Sneering at St. John and St. Paul,
At God and Man, at one and all;
And yet as hollow and false and drear,
As a cracked pitcher to the ear,
And ever growing worse and worse!
Whenever I pray, I pray for a curse
On Erasmus, the Insincere!

Philip Melanethon! thou alone
Faithful among the faithless known,
Thee I hail, and only thee!
Behold the record of us three!
   Res et verba Philippus,
   Res sine verbis Lutherus;
   Erasmus verba sine re!

My Philip, prayest thou for me?
Lifted above all earthly care,
From these high regions of the air,
Among the birds that day and night
Upon the branches of tall trees
Sing their lauds and litanies,
Praising God with all their might,
My Philip, unto thee I write,

My Philip! thou who knowest best
All that is passing in this breast;
The spiritual agonies,
The inward deaths, the inward hell,
And the divine new births as well,
That surely follow after these,
As after winter follows spring;
My Philip, in the night-time sing
This song of the Lord I send to thee;
And I will sing it for thy sake,
Until our answering voices make
A glorious antiphony,
And choral chant of victory!



PART THREE

THE NEW ENGLAND TRAGEDIES


JOHN ENDICOTT


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

JOHN ENDICOTT          Governor.
JOHN ENDICOTT          His son.
RICHARD BELLINGHAM     Deputy Governor.
JOHN NORTON            Minister of the Gospel.
EDWARD BUTTER          Treasurer.
WALTER MERRY           Tithing-man.
NICHOLAS UPSALL        An old citizen.
SAMUEL COLE            Landlord of the Three Mariners.

SIMON KEMPTHORN
RALPH GOLDSMITH        Sea-Captains.

WENLOCK CHRISTISON
EDITH, his daughter
EDWARD WHARTON         Quakers
    Assistants, Halberdiers, Marshal, etc.

    The Scene is in Boston in the year 1665.


PROLOGUE.

To-night we strive to read, as we may best,
This city, like an ancient palimpsest;
And bring to light, upon the blotted page,
The mournful record of an earlier age,
That, pale and half effaced, lies hidden away
Beneath the fresher writing of to-day.

Rise, then, O buried city that hast been;
Rise up, rebuilded in the painted scene,
And let our curious eyes behold once more
The pointed gable and the pent-house door,
The Meeting-house with leaden-latticed panes,
The narrow thoroughfares, the crooked lanes!

Rise, too, ye shapes and shadows of the Past,
Rise from your long-forgotten graves at last;
Let us behold your faces, let us hear
The words ye uttered in those days of fear
Revisit your familiar haunts again,--
The scenes of triumph, and the scenes of pain
And leave the footprints of your bleeding feet
Once more upon the pavement of the street!

Nor let the Historian blame the Poet here,
If he perchance misdate the day or year,
And group events together, by his art,
That in the Chronicles lie far apart;
For as the double stars, though sundered far,
Seem to the naked eye a single star,
So facts of history, at a distance seen,
Into one common point of light convene.

"Why touch upon such themes?" perhaps some friend
May ask, incredulous; "and to what good end?
Why drag again into the light of day
The errors of an age long passed away?"
I answer: "For the lessons that they teach:
The tolerance of opinion and of speech.
Hope, Faith, and Charity remain,--these three;
And greatest of them all is Charity."

Let us remember, if these words be true,
That unto all men Charity is due;
Give what we ask; and pity, while we blame,
Lest we become copartners in the shame,
Lest we condemn, and yet ourselves partake,
And persecute the dead for conscience' sake.

Therefore it is the author seeks and strives
To represent the dead as in their lives,
And lets at times his characters unfold
Their thoughts in their own language, strong and bold;
He only asks of you to do the like;
To hear hint first, and, if you will, then strike.


ACT I.

SCENE I. -- Sunday afternoon.  The interior of the Meeting-house.

On the pulpit, an hour-glass; below, a box for contributions.
JOHN NORTON in the pulpit.  GOVERNOR ENDICOTT in a canopied seat,
attended by four halberdiers.  The congregation singing.

  The Lord descended from above,
    And bowed the heavens high;
  And underneath his feet He cast
    The darkness of the sky.

  On Cherubim and Seraphim
    Right royally He rode,
  And on the wings of mighty winds
    Came flying all abroad.

NORTON (rising and turning the hourglass on the pulpit).
I heard a great voice from the temple saying
Unto the Seven Angels, Go your ways;
Pour out the vials of the wrath of God
Upon the earth.  And the First Angel went
And poured his vial on the earth; and straight
There fell a noisome and a grievous sore
On them which had the birth-mark of the Beast,
And them which worshipped and adored his image.
On us hath fallen this grievous pestilence.
There is a sense of terror in the air;
And apparitions of things horrible
Are seen by many; from the sky above us
The stars fall; and beneath us the earth quakes!
The sound of drums at midnight from afar,
The sound of horsemen riding to and fro,
As if the gates of the invisible world
Were opened, and the dead came forth to warn us,--
All these are omens of some dire disaster
Impending over us, and soon to fall,
Moreover, in the language of the Prophet,
Death is again come up into our windows,
To cut off little children from without,
And young men from the streets.  And in the midst
Of all these supernatural threats and warnings
Doth Heresy uplift its horrid head;
A vision of Sin more awful and appalling
Than any phantasm, ghost, or apparition,
As arguing and portending some enlargement
Of the mysterious Power of Darkness!

EDITH, barefooted, and clad in sackcloth, with her hair hanging
loose upon her shoulders, walks slowly up the aisle, followed by
WHARTON and other Quakers.  The congregation starts up in
confusion.

EDITH (to NORTON, raising her hand).
                              Peace!

NORTON.
Anathema maranatha!  The Lord cometh!

EDITH.
Yea, verily He cometh, and shall judge
The shepherds of Israel who do feed themselves,
And leave their flocks to eat what they have trodden
Beneath their feet.

NORTON.
           Be silent, babbling woman!
St. Paul commands all women to keep silence
Within the churches.

EDITH.
              Yet the women prayed
And prophesied at Corinth in his day;
And, among those on whom the fiery tongues
Of Pentecost descended, some were women!

NORTON.
The Elders of the Churches, by our law,
Alone have power to open the doors of speech
And silence in the Assembly.  I command you!

EDITH.
The law of God is greater than your laws!
Ye build your church with blood, your town with crime;
The heads thereof give judgment for reward;
The priests thereof teach only for their hire;
Your laws condemn the innocent to death;
And against this I bear my testimony!

NORTON.
What testimony?

EDITH.
             That of the Holy Spirit,
Which, as your Calvin says, surpasseth reason.

NORTON.
The laborer is worthy of his hire.

EDITH.
Yet our great Master did not teach for hire,
And the Apostles without purse or scrip
Went forth to do his work.  Behold this box
Beneath thy pulpit.  Is it for the poor?
Thou canst not answer.  It is for the Priest
And against this I bear my testimony.

NORTON.
Away with all these Heretics and Quakers!
Quakers, forsooth!  Because a quaking fell
On Daniel, at beholding of the Vision,
Must ye needs shake and quake?  Because Isaiah
Went stripped and barefoot, must ye wail and howl?
Must ye go stripped and naked? must ye make
A wailing like the dragons, and a mourning
As of the owls?  Ye verify the adage
That Satan is God's ape!  Away with them!

Tumult.  The Quakers are driven out with violence, EDITH
following slowly.  The congregation retires in confusion.

Thus freely do the Reprobates commit
Such measure of iniquity as fits them
For the intended measure of God's wrath
And even in violating God's commands
Are they fulfilling the divine decree!
The will of man is but an instrument
Disposed and predetermined to its action
According unto the decree of God,
Being as much subordinate thereto
As is the axe unto the hewer's hand!

He descends from the pulpit, and joins GOVERNOR ENDICOTT, who
comes forward to meet him.

The omens and the wonders of the time,
Famine, and fire, and shipwreck, and disease,
The blast of corn, the death of our young men,
Our sufferings in all precious, pleasant things,
Are manifestations of the wrath divine,
Signs of God's controversy with New England.
These emissaries of the Evil One,
These servants and ambassadors of Satan,
Are but commissioned executioners
Of God's vindictive and deserved displeasure.
We must receive them as the Roman Bishop
Once received Attila, saying, I rejoice
You have come safe, whom I esteem to be
The scourge of God, sent to chastise his people.
This very heresy, perchance, may serve
The purposes of God to some good end.
With you I leave it; but do not neglect
The holy tactics of the civil sword.

ENDICOTT.
And what more can be done?

NORTON.
                  The hand that cut
The Red Cross from the colors of the king
Can cut the red heart from this heresy.
Fear not.  All blasphemies immediate
And heresies turbulent must be suppressed
By civil power.

ENDICOTT.
          But in what way suppressed?

NORTON.
The Book of Deuteronomy declares
That if thy son, thy daughter, or thy wife,
Ay, or the friend which is as thine own soul,
Entice thee secretly, and say to thee,
Let us serve other gods, then shalt thine eye
Not pity him, but thou shalt surely kill him,
And thine own hand shall be the first upon him
To slay him.

ENDICOTT.
         Four already have been slain;
And others banished upon pain of death.
But they come back again to meet their doom,
Bringing the linen for their winding-sheets.
We must not go too far.  In truth, I shrink
From shedding of more blood.  The people murmur
At our severity.

NORTON.
                Then let them murmur!
Truth is relentless; justice never wavers;
The greatest firmness is the greatest mercy;
The noble order of the Magistracy
Cometh immediately from God, and yet
This noble order of the Magistracy
Is by these Heretics despised and outraged.

ENDICOTT.
To-night they sleep in prison.  If they die,
They cannot say that we have caused their death.
We do but guard the passage, with the sword
Pointed towards them; if they dash upon it,
Their blood will be on their own heads, not ours.

NORTON.
Enough.  I ask no more.  My predecessor
Coped only with the milder heresies
Of Antinomians and of Anabaptists.
He was not born to wrestle with these fiends.
Chrysostom in his pulpit; Augustine
In disputation; Timothy in his house!
The lantern of St. Botolph's ceased to burn
When from the portals of that church he came
To be a burning and a shining light
Here in the wilderness.  And, as he lay
On his death-bed, he saw me in a vision
Ride on a snow-white horse into this town.
His vision was prophetic; thus I came,
A terror to the impenitent, and Death
On the pale horse of the Apocalypse
To all the accursed race of Heretics!
                               [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- A street. On one side, NICHOLAS UPSALL's house; on
the other, WALTER MERRY's, with a flock of pigeons on the roof.
UPSALL seated in the porch of his house.

UPSALL.
O day of rest!  How beautiful, how fair,
How welcome to the weary and the old!
Day of the Lord! and truce to earthly cares!
Day of the Lord, as all our days should be!
Ah, why will man by his austerities
Shut out the blessed sunshine and the light,
And make of thee a dungeon of despair!

WALTER MERRY (entering and looking round him).
All silent as a graveyard!  No one stirring;
No footfall in the street, no sound of voices!
By righteous punishment and perseverance,
And perseverance in that punishment,
At last I have brought this contumacious town
To strict observance of the Sabbath day.
Those wanton gospellers, the pigeons yonder,
Are now the only Sabbath-breakers left.
I cannot put them down.  As if to taunt me,
They gather every Sabbath afternoon
In noisy congregation on my roof,
Billing and cooing.  Whir! take that, ye Quakers.

Throws a stone at the pigeons.  Sees UPSALL.

Ah! Master Nicholas!

UPSALL.
                     Good afternoon,
Dear neighbor Walter.

MERRY.
                     Master Nicholas,
You have to-day withdrawn yourself from meeting.

UPSALL.
Yea, I have chosen rather to worship God
Sitting in silence here at my own door.

MERRY.
Worship the Devil!  You this day have broken
Three of our strictest laws.  First, by abstaining
From public worship.  Secondly, by walking
Profanely on the Sabbath.

UPSALL.
                        Not one step.
I have been sitting still here, seeing the pigeons
Feed in the street and fly about the roofs.

MERRY.
You have been in the street with other intent
Than going to and from the Meeting-house.
And, thirdly, you are harboring Quakers here.
I am amazed!

UPSALL.
             Men sometimes, it is said,
Entertain angels unawares.

MERRY.
                          Nice angels!
Angels in broad-brimmed hats and russet cloaks,
The color of the Devil's nutting-bag.  They came
Into the Meeting-house this afternoon
More in the shape of devils than of angels.
The women screamed and fainted; and the boys
Made such an uproar in the gallery
I could not keep them quiet.

UPSALL.
                     Neighbor Walter,
Your persecution is of no avail.

MERRY.
'T is prosecution, as the Governor says,
Not persecution.

UPSALL.
                Well, your prosecution;
Your hangings do no good.

MERRY.
                      The reason is,
We do not hang enough.  But, mark my words,
We'll scour them; yea, I warrant ye, we'll scour them!
And now go in and entertain your angels,
And don't be seen here in the street again
Till after sundown!  There they are again!

Exit UPSALL.  MERRY throws another stone at the pigeons, and then
goes into his house.


SCENE III. -- A room in UPSALL'S house.  Night.  EDITH, WHARTON,
and other Quakers seated at a table.  UPSALL seated near them,
Several books on the table.

WHARTON.
William and Marmaduke, our martyred brothers,
Sleep in untimely graves, if aught untimely
Can find place in the providence of God,
Where nothing comes too early or too late.
I saw their noble death.  They to the scaffold
Walked hand in hand.  Two hundred armed men
And many horsemen guarded them, for fear
Of rescue by the crowd, whose hearts were stirred.

EDITH.
O holy martyrs!

WHARTON.
             When they tried to speak,
Their voices by the roll of drums were drowned.
When they were dead they still looked fresh and fair,
The terror of death was not upon their faces.
Our sister Mary, likewise, the meek woman,
Has passed through martyrdom to her reward;
Exclaiming, as they led her to her death,
"These many days I've been in Paradise."
And, when she died, Priest Wilson threw the hangman
His handkerchief, to cover the pale face
He dared not look upon.

EDITH.
                       As persecuted,
Yet not forsaken; as unknown, yet known;
As dying, and behold we are alive;
As sorrowful, and yet rejoicing always;
As having nothing, yet possessing all!

WHARTON.
And Leddra, too, is dead.  But from his prison,
The day before his death, he sent these words
Unto the little flock of Christ: "What ever
May come upon the followers of the Light,--
Distress, affliction, famine, nakedness,
Or perils in the city or the sea,
Or persecution, or even death itself,--
I am persuaded that God's armor of Light,
As it is loved and lived in, will preserve you.
Yea, death itself; through which you will find entrance
Into the pleasant pastures of the fold,
Where you shall feed forever as the herds
That roam at large in the low valleys of Achor.
And as the flowing of the ocean fills
Each creek and branch thereof, and then retires,
Leaving behind a sweet and wholesome savor;
So doth the virtue and the life of God
Flow evermore into the hearts of those
Whom He hath made partakers of His nature;
And, when it but withdraws itself a little,
Leaves a sweet savor after it, that many
Can say they are made clean by every word
That He hath spoken to them in their silence."

EDITH (rising and breaking into a kind of chant).
Truly we do but grope here in the dark,
Near the partition-wall of Life and Death,
At every moment dreading or desiring
To lay our hands upon the unseen door!
Let us, then, labor for an inward stillness,--
An inward stillness and an inward healing;
That perfect silence where the lips and heart
Are still, and we no longer entertain
Our own imperfect thoughts and vain opinions,
But God alone speaks in us, and we wait
In singleness of heart, that we may know
His will, and in the silence of our spirits,
That we may do His will, and do that only!

A long pause, interrupted by the sound of a drum approaching;
then shouts in the street, and a loud knocking at the door.

MARSHAL.
Within there! Open the door!

MERRY.
              Will no one answer?

MARSHAL.
In the King's name!  Within there!

MERRY.
                      Open the door!

UPSALL (from the window).
It is not barred.  Come in.  Nothing prevents you.
The poor man's door is ever on the latch.
He needs no bolt nor bar to shut out thieves;
He fears no enemies, and has no friends
Importunate enough to need a key.

Enter JOHN ENDICOTT, the MARSHAL, MERRY, and a crowd.  Seeing the
Quakers silent and unmoved, they pause, awe-struck.  ENDICOTT
opposite EDITH.

MARSHAL.
In the King's name do I arrest you all!
Away with them to prison.  Master Upsall,
You are again discovered harboring here
These ranters and disturbers of the peace.
You know the law.

UPSALL.
             I know it, and am ready
To suffer yet again its penalties.

EDITH (to ENDICOTT).
Why dost thou persecute me, Saul of Tarsus?



ACT II.

SCENE I. -- JOHN ENDICOTT's room.  Early morning.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
"Why dost thou persecute me, Saul of Tarsus?"
All night these words were ringing in mine ears!
A sorrowful sweet face; a look that pierced me
With meek reproach; a voice of resignation
That had a life of suffering in its tone;
And that was all!  And yet I could not sleep,
Or, when I slept, I dreamed that awful dream!
I stood beneath the elm-tree on the Common,
On which the Quakers have been hanged, and heard
A voice, not hers, that cried amid the darkness,
"This is Aceldama, the field of blood!
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice!"

Opens the window and looks out.

The sun is up already; and my heart
Sickens and sinks within me when I think
How many tragedies will be enacted
Before his setting.  As the earth rolls round,
It seems to me a huge Ixion's wheel,
Upon whose whirling spokes we are bound fast,
And must go with it!  Ah, how bright the sun
Strikes on the sea and on the masts of vessels,
That are uplifted, in the morning air,
Like crosses of some peaceable crusade!
It makes me long to sail for lands unknown,
No matter whither!  Under me, in shadow,
Gloomy and narrow, lies the little town,
Still sleeping, but to wake and toil awhile,
Then sleep again.  How dismal looks the prison,
How grim and sombre in the sunless street,--
The prison where she sleeps, or wakes and waits
For what I dare not think of,--death, perhaps!
A word that has been said may be unsaid:
It is but air.  But when a deed is done
It cannot be undone, nor can our thoughts
Reach out to all the mischiefs that may follow.
'T is time for morning prayers.  I will go down.
My father, though severe, is kind and just;
And when his heart is tender with devotion,--
When from his lips have fallen the words, "Forgive us
As we forgive,"--then will I intercede
For these poor people, and perhaps may save them.
                                     [Exit.


SCENE II. -- Dock Square.  On one side, the tavern of the Three
Mariners.  In the background, a quaint building with gables; and,
beyond it, wharves and shipping.  CAPTAIN KEMPTHORN and others
seated at a table before the door.  SAMUEL COLE standing near
them.

KEMPTHORN.
Come, drink about!  Remember Parson Melham,
And bless the man who first invented flip!

They drink.

COLE.
Pray, Master Kempthorn, where were you last night?

KEMPTHORN.
On board the Swallow, Simon Kempthorn, master,
Up for Barbadoes, and the Windward Islands.

COLE.
The town was in a tumult.

KEMPTHORN.
                       And for what?

COLE.
Your Quakers were arrested.

KEMPTHORN.
                   How my Quakers?

COLE.
These you brought in your vessel from Barbadoes.
They made an uproar in the Meeting-house
Yesterday, and they're now in prison for it.
I owe you little thanks for bringing them
To the Three Mariners.

KEMPTHORN.
            They have not harmed you.
I tell you, Goodman Cole, that Quaker girl
Is precious as a sea-bream's eye.  I tell you
It was a lucky day when first she set
Her little foot upon the Swallow's deck,
Bringing good luck, fair winds, and pleasant weather.

COLE.
I am a law-abiding citizen;
I have a seat in the new Meeting-house,
A cow-right on the Common; and, besides,
Am corporal in the Great Artillery.
I rid me of the vagabonds at once.

KEMPTHORN.
Why should you not have Quakers at your tavern
If you have fiddlers?

COLE.
                 Never! never! never!
If you want fiddling you must go elsewhere,
To the Green Dragon and the Admiral Vernon,
And other such disreputable places.
But the Three Mariners is an orderly house,
Most orderly, quiet, and respectable.
Lord Leigh said he could be as quiet here
As at the Governor's.  And have I not
King Charles's Twelve Good Rules, all framed and glazed,
Hanging in my best parlor?

KEMPTHORN.
                       Here's a health
To good King Charles.  Will you not drink the King?
Then drink confusion to old Parson Palmer.

COLE.
And who is Parson Palmer?  I don't know him.

KEMPTHORN.
He had his cellar underneath his pulpit,
And so preached o'er his liquor, just as you do.

A drum within.

COLE.
Here comes the Marshal.

MERRY (within).
         Make room for the Marshal.

KEMPTHORN.
How pompous and imposing he appears!
His great buff doublet bellying like a mainsail,
And all his streamers fluttering in the wind.
What holds he in his hand?

COLE.
                       A proclamation.

Enter the MARSHAL, with a proclamation; and MERRY, with a
halberd.  They are preceded by a drummer, and followed by the
hangman, with an armful of books, and a crowd of people, among
whom are UPSALL and JOHN ENDICOTT.  A pile is made of the books.

MERRY.
Silence, the drum!  Good citizens, attend
To the new laws enacted by the Court.

MARSHAL (reads).
"Whereas a cursed sect of Heretics
Has lately risen, commonly called Quakers,
Who take upon themselves to be commissioned
Immediately of God, and furthermore
Infallibly assisted by the Spirit
To write and utter blasphemous opinions,
Despising Government and the order of God
In Church and Commonwealth, and speaking evil
Of Dignities, reproaching and reviling
The Magistrates and Ministers, and seeking
To turn the people from their faith, and thus
Gain proselytes to their pernicious ways;--
This Court, considering the premises,
And to prevent like mischief as is wrought
By their means in our land, doth hereby order,
That whatsoever master or commander
Of any ship, bark, pink, or catch shall bring
To any roadstead, harbor, creek, or cove
Within this Jurisdiction any Quakers,
Or other blasphemous Heretics, shall pay
Unto the Treasurer of the Commonwealth
One hundred pounds, and for default thereof
Be put in prison, and continue there
Till the said sum be satisfied and paid."

COLE.
Now, Simon Kempthorn, what say you to that?

KEMPTHORN.
I pray you, Cole, lend me a hundred pounds!

MARSHAL (reads).
"If any one within this Jurisdiction
Shall henceforth entertain, or shall conceal
Quakers or other blasphemous Heretics,
Knowing them so to be, every such person
Shall forfeit to the country forty shillings
For each hour's entertainment or concealment,
And shall be sent to prison, as aforesaid,
Until the forfeiture be wholly paid!"

Murmurs in the crowd.

KEMPTHORN.
Now, Goodman Cole, I think your turn has come!

COLE.
Knowing them so to be!

KEMPTHORN.
                     At forty shillings
The hour, your fine will be some forty pounds!

COLE.
Knowing them so to be!  That is the law.

MARSHAL (reads).
"And it is further ordered and enacted,
If any Quaker or Quakers shall presume
To come henceforth into this Jurisdiction,
Every male Quaker for the first offence
Shall have one ear cut off; and shall be kept
At labor in the Workhouse, till such time
As he be sent away at his own charge.
And for the repetition of the offence
Shall have his other ear cut off, and then
Be branded in the palm of his right hand.
And every woman Quaker shall be whipt
Severely in three towns; and every Quaker,
Or he or she, that shall for a third time
Herein again offend, shall have their tongues
Bored through with a hot iron, and shall be
Sentenced to Banishment on pain of Death."

Loud murmurs.  The voice of CHRISTISON in the crowd.

O patience of the Lord!  How long, how long,
Ere thou avenge the blood of Thine Elect?

MERRY.
Silence, there, silence!  Do not break the peace!

MARSHAL (reads).
"Every inhabitant of this Jurisdiction
Who shall defend the horrible opinions
Of Quakers, by denying due respect
To equals and superiors, and withdrawing
From Church Assemblies, and thereby approving
The abusive and destructive practices
Of this accursed sect, in opposition
To all the orthodox received opinions
Of godly men shall be forthwith commit ted
Unto close prison for one month; and then
Refusing to retract and to reform
The opinions as aforesaid, he shall be
Sentenced to Banishment on pain of Death.
By the Court.  Edward Rawson, Secretary."
Now, hangman, do your duty.  Burn those books.

Loud murmurs in the crowd.  The pile of books is lighted.

UPSALL.
I testify against these cruel laws!
Forerunners are they of some judgment on us;
And, in the love and tenderness I bear
Unto this town and people, I beseech you,
O Magistrates, take heed, lest ye be found
As fighters against God!

JOHN ENDICOTT (taking UPSALL'S hand).
Upsall, I thank you
For speaking words such as some younger man,
I, or another, should have said before you.
Such laws as these are cruel and oppressive;
A blot on this fair town, and a disgrace
To any Christian people.

MERRY (aside, listening behind them).
                     Here's sedition!
I never thought that any good would come
Of this young popinjay, with his long hair
And his great boots, fit only for the Russians
Or barbarous Indians, as his father says!

THE VOICE.
Woe to the bloody town!  And rightfully
Men call it the Lost Town!  The blood of Abel
Cries from the ground, and at the final judgment
The Lord will say, "Cain, Cain! Where is thy brother?"

MERRY.
Silence there in the crowd!

UPSALL (aside).
                      'T is Christison!

THE VOICE.
O foolish people, ye that think to burn
And to consume the truth of God, I tell you
That every flame is a loud tongue of fire
To publish it abroad to all the world
Louder than tongues of men!

KEMPTHORN (springing to his feet).
                Well said, my hearty!
There's a brave fellow!  There's a man of pluck!
A man who's not afraid to say his say,
Though a whole town's against him.  Rain, rain, rain,
Bones of St. Botolph, and put out this fire!

The drum beats. Exeunt all but MERRY, KEMPTHORN, and COLE.

MERRY.
And now that matter's ended, Goodman Cole,
Fetch me a mug of ale, your strongest ale.

KEMPTHORN (sitting down).
And me another mug of flip; and put
Two gills of brandy in it.
                         [Exit COLE.

MERRY.
                         No; no more.
Not a drop more, I say.  You've had enough.

KEMPTHORN.
And who are you, sir?

MERRY.
                  I'm a Tithing-man,
And Merry is my name.

KEMPTHORN.
                  A merry name!
I like it; and I'll drink your merry health
Till all is blue.

MERRY.
            And then you will be clapped
Into the stocks, with the red letter D
Hung round about your neck for drunkenness.
You're a free-drinker,--yes, and a free-thinker!

KEMPTHORN.
And you are Andrew Merry, or Merry Andrew.

MERRY.
My name is Walter Merry, and not Andrew.

KEMPTHORN.
Andrew or Walter, you're a merry fellow;
I'll swear to that.

MERRY.
            No swearing, let me tell you.
The other day one Shorthose had his tongue
Put into a cleft stick for profane swearing.

COLE brings the ale.

KEMPTHORN.
Well, where's my flip?  As sure as my name's Kempthorn--

MERRY.
Is your name Kempthorn?

KEMPTHORN.
             That's the name I go by.

MERRY.
What, Captain Simon Kempthorn of the Swallow?

KEMPTHORN.
No other.

MERRY (touching him on the shoulder).
   Then you're wanted.  I arrest you
In the King's name.

KEMPTHORN.
            And where's your warrant?

MERRY (unfolding a paper, and reading).
                                Here.
Listen to me.  "Hereby you are required,
In the King's name, to apprehend the body
Of Simon Kempthorn, mariner, and him
Safely to bring before me, there to answer
All such objections as are laid to him,
Touching the Quakers."  Signed, John Endicott.

KEMPTHORN.
Has it the Governor's seal?

MERRY.
                        Ay, here it is.

KEMPTHORN.
Death's head and cross-bones.  That's a pirate's flag!

MERRY.
Beware how you revile the Magistrates;
You may be whipped for that.

KEMPTHORN.
               Then mum's the word.

Exeunt MERRY and KEMPTHORN.

COLE.
There's mischief brewing!  Sure, there's mischief brewing.
I feel like Master Josselyn when he found
The hornet's nest, and thought it some strange fruit,
Until the seeds came out, and then he dropped it.
                                 [Exit.


Scene III. -- A room in the Governor's house, Enter GOVERNOR
ENDICOTT and MERRY.

ENDICOTT.
My son, you say?

MERRY.
           Your Worship's eldest son.

ENDICOTT.
Speaking against the laws?

MERRY.
                    Ay, worshipful sir.

ENDICOTT.
And in the public market-place?

MERRY.
                             I saw him
With my own eyes, heard him with my own ears.

ENDICOTT.
Impossible!

MERRY.
          He stood there in the crowd
With Nicholas Upsall, when the laws were read
To-day against the Quakers, and I heard him
Denounce and vilipend them as unjust,
And cruel, wicked, and abominable.

ENDICOTT.
Ungrateful son!  O God! thou layest upon me
A burden heavier than I can bear!
Surely the power of Satan must be great
Upon the earth, if even the elect
Are thus deceived and fall away from grace!

MERRY.
Worshipful sir! I meant no harm--

ENDICOTT.
                           'T is well.
You've done your duty, though you've done it roughly,
And every word you've uttered since you came
Has stabbed me to the heart!

MERRY.
                         I do beseech
Your Worship's pardon!

ENDICOTT.
             He whom I have nurtured
And brought up in the reverence of the Lord!
The child of all my hopes and my affections!
He upon whom I leaned as a sure staff
For my old age!  It is God's chastisement
For leaning upon any arm but His!

MERRY.
Your Worship!--

ENDICOTT.
    And this comes from holding parley
With the delusions and deceits of Satan.
At once, forever, must they be crushed out,
Or all the land will reek with heresy!
Pray, have you any children?

MERRY.
                         No, not any.

ENDICOTT.
Thank God for that.  He has delivered you
From a great care.  Enough; my private griefs
Too long have kept me from the public service.

Exit MERRY, ENDICOTT seats himself at the table and arranges his
papers.

The hour has come; and I am eager now
To sit in judgment on these Heretics.

A knock.

Come in.  Who is it? (Not looking up).

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                    It is I.

ENDICOTT (restraining himself).
                            Sit down!

JOHN ENDICOTT (sitting down).
I come to intercede for these poor people
Who are in prison, and await their trial.

ENDICOTT.
It is of them I wished to speak with you.
I have been angry with you, but 't is passed.
For when I hear your footsteps come or go,
See in your features your dead mother's face,
And in your voice detect some tone of hers,
All anger vanishes, and I remember
The days that are no more, and come no more,
When as a child you sat upon my knee,
And prattled of your playthings, and the games
You played among the pear trees in the orchard!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Oh, let the memory of my noble mother
Plead with you to be mild and merciful!
For mercy more becomes a Magistrate
Than the vindictive wrath which men call justice!

ENDICOTT.
The sin of heresy is a deadly sin.
'T is like the falling of the snow, whose crystals
The traveller plays with, thoughtless of his danger,
Until he sees the air so full of light
That it is dark; and blindly staggering onward,
Lost and bewildered, he sits down to rest;
There falls a pleasant drowsiness upon him,
And what he thinks is sleep, alas! is death.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
And yet who is there that has never doubted?
And doubting and believing, has not said,
"Lord, I believe; help thou my unbelief"?

ENDICOTT.
In the same way we trifle with our doubts,
Whose shining shapes are like the stars descending;
Until at last, bewildered and dismayed,
Blinded by that which seemed to give us light,
We sink to sleep, and find that it is death,

Rising.

Death to the soul through all eternity!
Alas that I should see you growing up
To man's estate, and in the admonition
And nurture of the law, to find you now
Pleading for Heretics!

JOHN ENDICOTT (rising).
                    In the sight of God,
Perhaps all men are Heretics.  Who dares
To say that he alone has found the truth?
We cannot always feel and think and act
As those who go before us.  Had you done so,
You would not now be here.

ENDICOTT.
                 Have you forgotten
The doom of Heretics, and the fate of those
Who aid and comfort them?  Have you forgotten
That in the market-place this very day
You trampled on the laws?  What right have you,
An inexperienced and untravelled youth,
To sit in judgment here upon the acts
Of older men and wiser than yourself,
Thus stirring up sedition in the streets,
And making me a byword and a jest?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Words of an inexperienced youth like me
Were powerless if the acts of older men
Were not before them.  'T is these laws themselves
Stir up sedition, not my judgment of them.

ENDICOTT.
Take heed, lest I be called, as Brutus was,
To be the judge of my own son.  Begone!
When you are tired of feeding upon husks,
Return again to duty and submission,
But not till then.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                I hear and I obey!
                                 [Exit.
ENDICOTT.
Oh happy, happy they who have no children!
He's gone!  I hear the hall door shut behind him.
It sends a dismal echo through my heart,
As if forever it had closed between us,
And I should look upon his face no more!
Oh, this will drag me down into my grave,--
To that eternal resting-place wherein
Man lieth down, and riseth not again!
Till the heavens be no more, he shall not wake,
Nor be roused from his sleep; for Thou dost change
His countenance and sendest him away!
                                [Exit.



ACT III.

SCENE I. -- The Court of Assistants, ENDICOTT, BELLINGHAM,
ATHERTON, and other magistrates.  KEMPTHORN, MERRY, and
constables.  Afterwards WHARTON, EDITH, and CHRISTISON.

ENDICOTT.
Call Captain Simon Kempthorn.

MERRY.
                   Simon Kempthorn,
Come to the bar!

KEMPTHORN comes forward.

ENDICOTT.
          You are accused of bringing
Into this Jurisdiction, from Barbadoes,
Some persons of that sort and sect of people
Known by the name of Quakers, and maintaining
Most dangerous and heretical opinions,
Purposely coming here to propagate
Their heresies and errors; bringing with them
And spreading sundry books here, which contain
Their doctrines most corrupt and blasphemous,
And contrary to the truth professed among us.
What say you to this charge?

KEMPTHORN.

                    I do acknowledge,
Among the passengers on board the Swallow
Were certain persons saying Thee and Thou.
They seemed a harmless people, mostways silent,
Particularly when they said their prayers.

ENDICOTT.
Harmless and silent as the pestilence!
You'd better have brought the fever or the plague
Among us in your ship!  Therefore, this Court,
For preservation of the Peace and Truth,
Hereby commands you speedily to transport,
Or cause to be transported speedily,
The aforesaid persons hence unto Barbadoes,
From whence they came; you paying all the charges
Of their imprisonment.

KEMPTHORN.
                      Worshipful sir,
No ship e'er prospered that has carried Quakers
Against their will!  I knew a vessel once--

ENDICOTT.
And for the more effectual performance
Hereof you are to give security
In bonds amounting to one hundred pounds.
On your refusal, you will be committed
To prison till you do it.

KEMPTHORN.
                         But you see
I cannot do it.  The law, sir, of Barbadoes
Forbids the landing Quakers on the island.

ENDICOTT.
Then you will be committed.  Who comes next?

MERRY.
There is another charge against the Captain.

ENDICOTT.
What is it?

MERRY.
Profane swearing, please your Worship.
He cursed and swore from Dock Square to the Court-house,

ENDICOTT.
Then let him stand in the pillory for one hour.

[Exit KEMPTHORN with constable.

Who's next?

MERRY.
       The Quakers.

ENDICOTT.
               Call them.

MERRY.
                   Edward Wharton,
Come to the bar!

WHARTON.
              Yea, even to the bench.

ENDICOTT.
Take off your hat.

WHARTON.
                My hat offendeth not.
If it offendeth any, let him take it;
For I shall not resist.

ENDICOTT.
                       Take off his hat.
Let him be fined ten shillings for contempt.

MERRY takes off WHARTON'S hat.

WHARTON.
What evil have I done?

ENDICOTT.
                 Your hair's too long;
And in not putting off your hat to us
You've disobeyed and broken that commandment
Which sayeth "Honor thy father and thy mother."

WHARTON.
John Endicott, thou art become too proud;
And loved him who putteth off the hat,
And honoreth thee by bowing of the body,
And sayeth "Worshipful sir!"  'T is time for thee
To give such follies over, for thou mayest
Be drawing very near unto thy grave.

ENDICOTT.
Now, sirrah, leave your canting.  Take the oath.

WHARTON.
Nay, sirrah me no sirrahs!

ENDICOTT.
                      Will you swear?

WHARTON.
Nay, I will not.

ENDICOTT.
         You made a great disturbance
And uproar yesterday in the Meeting-house,
Having your hat on.

WHARTON.
              I made no disturbance;
For peacefully I stood, like other people.
I spake no words; moved against none my hand;
But by the hair they haled me out, and dashed
Their hooks into my face.

ENDICOTT.
                 You, Edward Wharton,
On pain of death, depart this Jurisdiction
Within ten days.  Such is your sentence.  Go.

WHARTON.
John Endicott, it had been well for thee
If this day's doings thou hadst left undone
But, banish me as far as thou hast power,
Beyond the guard and presence of my God
Thou canst not banish me.

ENDICOTT.
                     Depart the Court;
We have no time to listen to your babble.
Who's next?                [Exit WHARTON.

MERRY.
   This woman, for the same offence.

EDITH comes forward.

ENDICOTT.
What is your name?

EDITH.
          'T is to the world unknown,
But written in the Book of Life.

ENDICOTT.
                            Take heed
It be not written in the Book of Death!
What is it?

EDITH.
          Edith Christison.

ENDICOTT (with eagerness).
                        The daughter
Of Wenlock Christison?

EDITH.
                    I am his daughter.

ENDICOTT.
Your father hath given us trouble many times.
A bold man and a violent, who sets
At naught the authority of our Church and State,
And is in banishment on pain of death.
Where are you living?

EDITH.
                In the Lord.

ENDICOTT.
                        Make answer
Without evasion.  Where?

EDITH.
                   My outward being
Is in Barbadoes.

ENDICOTT.
             Then why come you here?

EDITH.
I come upon an errand of the Lord.

ENDICOTT.
'Tis not the business of the Lord you're doing;
It is the Devil's.  Will you take the oath?
Give her the Book.

MERRY offers the Book.

EDITH.
               You offer me this Book
To swear on; and it saith, "Swear not at all,
Neither by heaven, because it is God's Throne,
Nor by the earth, because it is his footstool!"
I dare not swear.

ENDICOTT.
      You dare not?  Yet you Quakers
Deny this book of Holy Writ, the Bible,
To be the Word of God.

EDITH (reverentially).
                  Christ is the Word,
The everlasting oath of God.  I dare not.

ENDICOTT.
You own yourself a Quaker,--do you not?

EDITH.
I own that in derision and reproach
I am so called.

ENDICOTT.
          Then you deny the Scripture
To be the rule of life.

EDITH.
                       Yea, I believe
The Inner Light, and not the Written Word,
To be the rule of life.

ENDICOTT.
                       And you deny
That the Lord's Day is holy.

EDITH.
                            Every day
Is the Lords Day.  It runs through all our lives,
As through the pages of the Holy Bible,
"Thus saith the Lord."

ENDICOTT.
           You are accused of making
An horrible disturbance, and affrighting
The people in the Meeting-house on Sunday.
What answer make you?

EDITH.
                      I do not deny
That I was present in your Steeple-house
On the First Day; but I made no disturbance.

ENDICOTT.
Why came you there?

EDITH.
      Because the Lord commanded.
His word was in my heart, a burning fire
Shut up within me and consuming me,
And I was very weary with forbearing;
I could not stay.

ENDICOTT.
   'T was not the Lord that sent you;
As an incarnate devil did you come!

EDITH.
On the First Day, when, seated in my chamber,
I heard the bells toll, calling you together,
The sound struck at my life, as once at his,
The holy man, our Founder, when he heard
The far-off bells toll in the Vale of Beavor.
It sounded like a market bell to call
The folk together, that the Priest might set
His wares to sale.  And the Lord said within me,
"Thou must go cry aloud against that Idol,
And all the worshippers thereof."  I went
Barefooted, clad in sackcloth, and I stood
And listened at the threshold; and I heard
The praying and the singing and the preaching,
Which were but outward forms, and without power.
Then rose a cry within me, and my heart
Was filled with admonitions and reproofs.
Remembering how the Prophets and Apostles
Denounced the covetous hirelings and diviners,
I entered in, and spake the words the Lord
Commanded me to speak.  I could no less.

ENDICOTT.
Are you a Prophetess?

EDITH.
                    Is it not written,
"Upon my handmaidens will I pour out
My spirit, and they shall prophesy"?

ENDICOTT.
                              Enough;
For out of your own mouth are you condemned!
Need we hear further?

THE JUDGES.
                      We are satisfied.

ENDICOTT.
It is sufficient.  Edith Christison,
The sentence of the Court is, that you be
Scourged in three towns, with forty stripes save one,
Then banished upon pain of death!

EDITH.
                       Your sentence
Is truly no more terrible to me
Than had you blown a feather into the the air,
And, as it fell upon me, you had said,
Take heed it hurt thee not!  God's will he done!

WENLOCK CHRISTISON (unseen in the crowd).
Woe to the city of blood!  The stone shall cry
Out of the wall; the beam from out the timber
Shall answer it!  Woe unto him that buildeth
A town with blood, and stablisheth a city
By his iniquity!

ENDICOTT.
                  Who is it makes
Such outcry here?

CHRISTISON (coming forward).
                I, Wenlock Christison!

ENDICOTT.
Banished on pain of death, why come you here?

CHRISTISON.
I come to warn you that you shed no more
The blood of innocent men!  It cries aloud
For vengeance to the Lord!

ENDICOTT.
                     Your life is forfeit
Unto the law; and you shall surely die,
And shall not live.

CHRISTISON.
                    Like unto Eleazer,
Maintaining the excellence of ancient years
And the honor of his gray head, I stand before you;
Like him disdaining all hypocrisy,
Lest, through desire to live a little longer,
I get a stain to my old age and name!

ENDICOTT.
Being in banishment, on pain of death,
You come now in among us in rebellion.

CHRISTISON.
I come not in among you in rebellion,
But in obedience to the Lord of heaven.
Not in contempt to any Magistrate,
But only in the love I bear your souls,
As ye shall know hereafter, when all men
Give an account of deeds done in the body!
God's righteous judgments ye cannot escape.

ONE OF THE JUDGES.
Those who have gone before you said the same,
And yet no judgment of the Lord hath fallen
Upon us.

CHRISTISON.
       He but waiteth till the measure
Of your iniquities shall be filled up,
And ye have run your race.  Then will his wrath
Descend upon you to the uttermost!
For thy part, Humphrey Atherton, it hangs
Over thy head already.  It shall come
Suddenly, as a thief doth in the night,
And in the hour when least thou thinkest of it!

ENDICOTT.
We have a law, and by that law you die.

CHRISTISON.
I, a free man of England and freeborn,
Appeal unto the laws of mine own nation!

ENDICOTT.
There's no appeal to England from this Court!
What! do you think our statutes are but paper?
Are but dead leaves that rustle in the wind?
Or litter to be trampled under foot?
What say ye, Judges of the Court,--what say ye?
Shall this man suffer death?  Speak your opinions.

ONE OF THE JUDGES.
I am a mortal man, and die I must,
And that erelong; and I must then appear
Before the awful judgment-seat of Christ,
To give account of deeds done in the body.
My greatest glory on that day will be,
That I have given my vote against this man.

CHRISTISON.
If, Thomas Danforth, thou hast nothing more
To glory in upon that dreadful day
Than blood of innocent people, then thy glory
Will be turned into shame!  The Lord hath said it!

ANOTHER JUDGE.
I cannot give consent, while other men
Who have been banished upon pain of death
Are now in their own houses here among us.

ENDICOTT.
Ye that will not consent, make record of it.
I thank my God that I am not afraid
To give my judgment.  Wenlock Christison,
You must be taken back from hence to prison,
Thence to the place of public execution,
There to be hanged till you be dead--dead,--dead.

CHRISTISON.
If ye have power to take my life from me,--
Which I do question,--God hath power to raise
The principle of life in other men,
And send them here among you.  There shall be
No peace unto the wicked, saith my God.
Listen, ye Magistrates, for the Lord hath said it!
The day ye put his servitors to death,
That day the Day of your own Visitation,
The Day of Wrath shall pass above your heads,
And ye shall be accursed forevermore!

To EDITH, embracing her.

Cheer up, dear heart! they have not power to harm us.

[Exeunt CHRISTISON and EDITH guarded.  The Scene closes.



SCENE II. -- A street.  Enter JOHN ENDICOTT and UPSALL.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Scourged in three towns! and yet the busy people
Go up and down the streets on their affairs
Of business or of pleasure, as if nothing
Had happened to disturb them or their thoughts!
When bloody tragedies like this are acted,
The pulses of a nation should stand still
The town should be in mourning, and the people
Speak only in low whispers to each other.

UPSALL.
I know this people; and that underneath
A cold outside there burns a secret fire
That will find vent and will not be put out,
Till every remnant of these barbarous laws
Shall be to ashes burned, and blown away.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Scourged in three towns!  It is incredible
Such things can be!  I feel the blood within me
Fast mounting in rebellion, since in vain
Have I implored compassion of my father!

UPSALL.
You know your father only as a father;
I know him better as a Magistrate.
He is a man both loving and severe;
A tender heart; a will inflexible.
None ever loved him more than I have loved him.
He is an upright man and a just man
In all things save the treatment of the Quakers.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Yet I have found him cruel and unjust
Even as a father.  He has driven me forth
Into the street; has shut his door upon me,
With words of bitterness.  I am as homeless
As these poor Quakers are.

UPSALL.
                  Then come with me.
You shall be welcome for your father's sake,
And the old friendship that has been between us.
He will relent erelong.  A father's anger
Is like a sword without a handle, piercing
Both ways alike, and wounding him that wields it
No less than him that it is pointed at.
                                [Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- The prison.  Night.  EDITH reading the Bible by a
lamp.


EDITH.
"Blessed are ye when men shall persecute you,
And shall revile you, and shall say against you
All manner of evil falsely for my sake!
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great
Is your reward in heaven.  For so the prophets,
Which were before you, have been persecuted."

Enter JOHN ENDICOTT.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Edith!

EDITH.
      Who is it that speaketh?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                       Saul of Tarsus:
As thou didst call me once.

EDITH (coming forward).
                      Yea, I remember.
Thou art the Governor's son.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                         I am ashamed
Thou shouldst remember me.

EDITH.
                    Why comest thou
Into this dark guest-chamber in the night?
What seekest thou?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                  Forgiveness!

EDITH.
                           I forgive
All who have injured me.  What hast thou done?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
I have betrayed thee, thinking that in this
I did God service.  Now, in deep contrition,
I come to rescue thee.

EDITH.
                   From what?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                         From prison.
EDITH.
I am safe here within these gloomy walls.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
From scourging in the streets, and in three towns!

EDITH.
Remembering who was scourged for me, I shrink not
Nor shudder at the forty stripes save one.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Perhaps from death itself!

EDITH.
                      I fear not death,
Knowing who died for me.

JOHN ENDICOTT (aside).
                   Surely some divine
Ambassador is speaking through those lips
And looking through those eyes!  I cannot answer!

EDITH.
If all these prison doors stood opened wide
I would not cross the threshold,--not one step.
There are invisible bars I cannot break;
There are invisible doors that shut me in,
And keep me ever steadfast to my purpose.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Thou hast the patience and the faith of Saints!

EDITH.
Thy Priest hath been with me this day to save me,
Not only from the death that comes to all,
But from the second death!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                        The Pharisee!
My heart revolts against him and his creed!
Alas! the coat that was without a seam
Is rent asunder by contending sects;
Each bears away a portion of the garment,
Blindly believing that he has the whole!

EDITH.
When Death, the Healer, shall have touched our eyes
With moist clay of the grave, then shall we see
The truth as we have never yet beheld it.
But he that overcometh shall not be
Hurt of the second death.  Has he forgotten
The many mansions in our father's house?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
There is no pity in his iron heart!
The hands that now bear stamped upon their palms
The burning sign of Heresy, hereafter
Shall be uplifted against such accusers,
And then the imprinted letter and its meaning
Will not be Heresy, but Holiness!

EDITH.
Remember, thou condemnest thine own father!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
I have no father!  He has cast me off.
I am as homeless as the wind that moans
And wanders through the streets.  Oh, come with me!
Do not delay.  Thy God shall be my God,
And where thou goest I will go.

EDITH.
                              I cannot.
Yet will I not deny it, nor conceal it;
From the first moment I beheld thy face
I felt a tenderness in my soul towards thee.
My mind has since been inward to the Lord,
Waiting his word.  It has not yet been spoken.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
I cannot wait.  Trust me.  Oh, come with me!

EDITH.
In the next room, my father, an old man,
Sitteth imprisoned and condemned to death,
Willing to prove his faith by martyrdom;
And thinkest thou his daughter would do less?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Oh, life is sweet, and death is terrible!

EDITH.
I have too long walked hand in hand with death
To shudder at that pale familiar face.
But leave me now.  I wish to be alone.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Not yet.  Oh, let me stay.

EDITH.
                     Urge me no more.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Alas! good-night.  I will not say good-by!

EDITH.
Put this temptation underneath thy feet.
To him that overcometh shall be given
The white stone with the new name written on it,
That no man knows save him that doth receive it,
And I will give thee a new name, and call thee
Paul of Damascus, and not Saul of Tarsus.

[Exit ENDICOTT.  EDITH sits down again to read the Bible.


ACT IV.

SCENE I. -- King Street, in front of the town-house.  KEMPTHORN
in the pillory.  MERRY and a crowd of lookers-on.

KEMPTHORN (sings).
  The world is full of care,
    Much like unto a bubble;
  Women and care, and care and women,
    And women and care and trouble.

Good Master Merry, may I say confound?

MERRY.
Ay, that you may.

KEMPTHORN.
      Well, then, with your permission,
Confound the Pillory!

MERRY.
                That's the very thing
The joiner said who made the Shrewsbury stocks.
He said, Confound the stocks, because they put him
Into his own.  He was the first man in them.

KEMPTHORN.
For swearing, was it?

MERRY.
               No, it was for charging;
He charged the town too much; and so the town,
To make things square, set him in his own stocks,
And fined him five pounds sterling,--just enough
To settle his own bill.

KEMPTHORN.
                  And served him right;
But, Master Merry, is it not eight bells?

MERRY.
Not quite.

KEMPTHORN.
   For, do you see?  I'm getting tired
Of being perched aloft here in this cro' nest
Like the first mate of a whaler, or a Middy
Mast-headed, looking out for land!  Sail ho!
Here comes a heavy-laden merchant-man
With the lee clews eased off and running free
Before the wind.  A solid man of Boston.
A comfortable man, with dividends,
And the first salmon, and the first green peas.

A gentleman passes.

He does not even turn his head to look.
He's gone without a word.  Here comes another,
A different kind of craft on a taut bow-line,--
Deacon Giles Firmin the apothecary,
A pious and a ponderous citizen,
Looking as rubicund and round and splendid
As the great bottle in his own shop window!

DEACON FIRMIN passes.

And here's my host of the Three Mariners,
My creditor and trusty taverner,
My corporal in the Great Artillery!
He's not a man to pass me without speaking.

COLE looks away and passes.

Don't yaw so; keep your luff, old hypocrite!
Respectable, ah yes, respectable,
You, with your seat in the new Meeting-house,
Your cow-right on the Common!  But who's this?
I did not know the Mary Ann was in!
And yet this is my old friend, Captain Goldsmith,
As sure as I stand in the bilboes here.
Why, Ralph, my boy!

Enter RALPH GOLDSMITH.

GOLDSMITH.
                  Why, Simon, is it you?
Set in the bilboes?

KEMPTHORN.
                 Chock-a-block, you see,
And without chafing-gear.

GOLDSMITH.
                   And what's it for?

KEMPTHORN.
Ask that starbowline with the boat-hook there,
That handsome man.

MERRY (bowing).
              For swearing.

KEMPTHORN.

                      In this town
They put sea-captains in the stocks for swearing,
And Quakers for not swearing.  So look out.

GOLDSMITH.
I pray you set him free; he meant no harm;
'T is an old habit he picked up afloat.

MERRY.
Well, as your time is out, you may come down,
The law allows you now to go at large
Like Elder Oliver's horse upon the Common.

KEMPTHORN.
Now, hearties, bear a hand!  Let go and haul.

KEMPTHORN is set free, and comes forward, shaking GOLDSMITH'S
hand.

KEMPTHORN.
Give me your hand, Ralph.  Ah, how good it feels!
The hand of an old friend.

GOLDSMITH.
                God bless you, Simon!

KEMPTHORN.
Now let us make a straight wake for the tavern
Of the Three Mariners, Samuel Cole commander;
Where we can take our ease, and see the shipping,
And talk about old times.

GOLDSMITH.
                      First I must pay
My duty to the Governor, and take him
His letters and despatches.  Come with me.

KEMPTHORN.
I'd rather not.  I saw him yesterday.

GOLDSMITH.
Then wait for me at the Three Nuns and Comb.

KEMPTHORN.
I thank you.  That's too near to the town pump.
I will go with you to the Governor's,
And wait outside there, sailing off and on;
If I am wanted, you can hoist a signal.

MERRY.
Shall I go with you and point out the way?

GOLDSMITH.
Oh no, I thank you.  I am not a stranger
Here in your crooked little town.

MERRY.
                         How now, sir?
Do you abuse our town?          [Exit.

GOLDSMITH.
                     Oh, no offence.

KEMPTHORN.
Ralph, I am under bonds for a hundred pound.

GOLDSMITH.
Hard lines.  What for?

KEMPTHORN.
            To take some Quakers back
I brought here from Barbadoes in the Swallow.
And how to do it I don't clearly see,
For one of them is banished, and another
Is sentenced to be hanged!  What shall I do?

GOLDSMITH.
Just slip your hawser on some cloudy night;
Sheer off, and pay it with the topsail, Simon!
                                   [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- Street in front of the prison.  In the background a
gateway and several flights of steps leading up terraces to the
Governor's house.  A pump on one side of the street.  JOHN
ENDICOTT, MERRY, UPSALL, and others.  A drum beats.


JOHN ENDICOTT.
Oh shame, shame, shame!

MERRY.
             Yes, it would be a shame
But for the damnable sin of Heresy!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
A woman scourged and dragged about our streets!

MERRY.
Well, Roxbury and Dorchester must take
Their share of shame.  She will be whipped in each!
Three towns, and Forty Stripes save one; that makes
Thirteen in each.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
      And are we Jews or Christians?
See where she comes, amid a gaping crowd!
And she a child.  Oh, pitiful! pitiful!
There's blood upon her clothes, her hands, her feet!

Enter MARSHAL and a drummer.  EDITH, stripped to the waist,
followed by the hangman with a scourge, and a noisy crowd.

EDITH.
Here let me rest one moment.  I am tired.
Will some one give me water?

MERRY.
                         At his peril.

UPSALL.
Alas! that I should live to see this day!

A WOMAN.
Did I forsake my father and my mother
And come here to New England to see this?

EDITH.
I am athirst.  Will no one give me water?

JOHN ENDICOTT (making his way through the crowd with water).
In the Lord's name!

EDITH (drinking.

               In his name I receive it!
Sweet as the water of Samaria's well
This water tastes.  I thank thee.  Is it thou?
I was afraid thou hadst deserted me.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Never will I desert thee, nor deny thee.
Be comforted.

MERRY.
              O Master Endicott,
Be careful what you say.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                   Peace, idle babbler!

MERRY.
You'll rue these words!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
             Art thou not better now?

EDITH.
They've struck me as with roses.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                   Ah, these wounds!
These bloody garments!

EDITH.
                    It is granted me
To seal my testimony with my blood.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
O blood-red seal of man's vindictive wrath!
O roses in the garden of the Lord!
I, of the household of Iscariot,
I have betrayed in thee my Lord and Master.

WENLOCK CHRISTISON appears above, at the window of the prison,
stretching out his hands through the bars.

CHRISTISON.
Be of good courage, O my child! my child!
Blessed art thou when men shall persecute thee!
Fear not their faces, saith the Lord, fear not,
For I am with thee to deliver thee.

A CITIZEN.
Who is it crying from the prison yonder.

MERRY.
It is old Wenlock Christison.

CHRISTISON.
                             Remember
Him who was scourged, and mocked, and crucified!
I see his messengers attending thee.
Be steadfast, oh, be steadfast to the end!

EDITH (with exultation).
I cannot reach thee with these arms, O father!
But closely in my soul do I embrace thee
And hold thee.  In thy dungeon and thy death
I will be with thee, and will comfort thee.

MARSHAL.
Come, put an end to this.  Let the drum beat.

The drum beats.  Exeunt all but JOHN ENDICOTT, UPSALL, and MERRY.

CHRISTISON.
Dear child, farewell!  Never shall I behold
Thy face again with these bleared eyes of flesh;
And never wast thou fairer, lovelier, dearer
Than now, when scourged and bleeding, and insulted
For the truth's sake.  O pitiless, pitiless town!
The wrath of God hangs over thee; and the day
Is near at hand when thou shalt be abandoned
To desolation and the breeding of nettles.
The bittern and the cormorant shall lodge
Upon thine upper lintels, and their voice
Sing in thy windows.  Yea, thus saith the Lord!

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Awake! awake! ye sleepers, ere too late,
And wipe these bloody statutes from your books!
                                  [Exit.

MERRY.
Take heed; the walls have ears!

UPSALL.
                    At last, the heart
Of every honest man must speak or break!

Enter GOVERNOR ENDICOTT with his halberdiers.

ENDICOTT.
What is this stir and tumult in the street?

MERRY.
Worshipful sir, the whipping of a girl,
And her old father howling from the prison.

ENDICOTT (to his halberdiers).
Go on.

CHRISTISON.
       Antiochus!  Antiochus!
O thou that slayest the Maccabees!  The Lord
Shall smite thee with incurable disease,
And no man shall endure to carry thee!

MERRY.
Peace, old blasphemer!

CHRISTISON.
                    I both feel and see
The presence and the waft of death go forth
Against thee, and already thou dost look
Like one that's dead!

MERRY (pointing).
            And there is your own son,
Worshipful sir, abetting the sedition.

ENDICOTT.
Arrest him.  Do not spare him.

MERRY (aside).
                        His own child!
There is some special providence takes care
That none shall be too happy in this world!
His own first-born.

ENDICOTT.
                  O Absalom, my son!

[Exeunt; the Governor with his halberdiers ascending the steps of
his house.


SCENE III. -- The Governor's private room.  Papers upon the
table.

ENDICOTT and BELLINGHAM

ENDICOTT.
There is a ship from England has come in,
Bringing despatches and much news from home,
His majesty was at the Abbey crowned;
And when the coronation was complete
There passed a mighty tempest o'er the city,
Portentous with great thunderings and lightnings.

BELLINGHAM.
After his father's, if I well remember,
There was an earthquake, that foreboded evil.

ENDICOTT.
Ten of the Regicides have been put to death!
The bodies of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw
Have been dragged from their graves, and publicly
Hanged in their shrouds at Tyburn.

BELLINGHAM.
                             Horrible!

ENDICOTT.
Thus the old tyranny revives again.
Its arm is long enough to reach us here,
As you will see.  For, more insulting still
Than flaunting in our faces dead men's shrouds,
Here is the King's Mandamus, taking from us,
From this day forth, all power to punish Quakers.

BELLINGHAM.
That takes from us all power; we are but puppets,
And can no longer execute our laws.

ENDICOTT.
His Majesty begins with pleasant words,
"Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well;"
Then with a ruthless hand he strips from me
All that which makes me what I am; as if
From some old general in the field, grown gray
In service, scarred with many wounds,
Just at the hour of victory, he should strip
His badge of office and his well-gained honors,
And thrust him back into the ranks again.

Opens the Mandamus and hands it to BELLINGHAM; and, while he is
reading, ENDICOTT walks up and down the room.

Here, read it for yourself; you see his words
Are pleasant words--considerate--not reproachful--
Nothing could be more gentle--or more royal;
But then the meaning underneath the words,
Mark that.  He says all people known as Quakers
Among us, now condemned to suffer death
Or any corporal punishment whatever,
Who are imprisoned, or may be obnoxious
To the like condemnation, shall be sent
Forthwith to England, to be dealt with there
In such wise as shall be agreeable
Unto the English law and their demerits.
Is it not so?

BELLINGHAM (returning the paper).
             Ay, so the paper says.

ENDICOTT.
It means we shall no longer rule the Province;
It means farewell to law and liberty,
Authority, respect for Magistrates,
The peace and welfare of the Commonwealth.
If all the knaves upon this continent
Can make appeal to England, and so thwart
The ends of truth and justice by delay,
Our power is gone forever.  We are nothing
But ciphers, valueless save when we follow
Some unit; and our unit is the King!
'T is he that gives us value.

BELLINGHAM.
                             I confess
Such seems to be the meaning of this paper,
But being the King's Mandamus, signed and sealed,
We must obey, or we are in rebellion.

ENDICOTT.
I tell you, Richard Bellingham,--I tell you,
That this is the beginning of a struggle
Of which no mortal can foresee the end.
I shall not live to fight the battle for you,
I am a man disgraced in every way;
This order takes from me my self-respect
And the respect of others.  'T is my doom,
Yes, my death-warrant, but must be obeyed!
Take it, and see that it is executed
So far as this, that all be set at large;
But see that none of them be sent to England
To bear false witness, and to spread reports
That might be prejudicial to ourselves.
                     [Exit BELLINGHAM.

There's a dull pain keeps knocking at my heart,
Dolefully saying, "Set thy house in order,
For thou shalt surely die, and shalt not live!
For me the shadow on the dial-plate
Goeth not back, but on into the dark!
                                  [Exit.


SCENE IV. -- The street.  A crowd, reading a placard on the door
of the Meeting-house.  NICHOLAS UPSALL among them.  Enter John
Norton.

NORTON.
What is this gathering here?

UPSALL.
                   One William Brand,
An old man like ourselves, and weak in body,
Has been so cruelly tortured in his prison,
The people are excited, and they threaten
To tear the prison down.

NORTON.
                 What has been done?

UPSALL.
He has been put in irons, with his neck
And heels tied close together, and so left
From five in the morning until nine at night.

NORTON.
What more was done?

UPSALL.
          He has been kept five days
In prison without food, and cruelly beaten,
So that his limbs were cold, his senses stopped.

NORTON.
What more?

UPSALL.
         And is this not enough?

NORTON.
                        Now hear me.
This William Brand of yours has tried to beat
Our Gospel Ordinances black and blue;
And, if he has been beaten in like manner,
It is but justice, and I will appear
In his behalf that did so.  I suppose
That he refused to work.

UPSALL.
                     He was too weak.
How could an old man work, when he was starving?

NORTON.
And what is this placard?

UPSALL.
                      The Magistrates,
To appease the people and prevent a tumult,
Have put up these placards throughout the town,
Declaring that the jailer shall be dealt with
Impartially and sternly by the Court.

NORTON (tearing down the placard).
Down with this weak and cowardly concession,
This flag of truce with Satan and with Sin!
I fling it in his face!  I trample it
Under my feet!  It is his cunning craft,
The masterpiece of his diplomacy,
To cry and plead for boundless toleration.
But toleration is the first-born child
Of all abominations and deceits.
There is no room in Christ's triumphant army
For tolerationists.  And if an Angel
Preach any other gospel unto you
Than that ye have received, God's malediction
Descend upon him!  Let him be accursed!
                                  [Exit.

UPSALL.
Now, go thy ways, John Norton, go thy ways,
Thou Orthodox Evangelist, as men call thee!
But even now there cometh out of England,
Like an o'ertaking and accusing conscience,
An outraged man, to call thee to account
For the unrighteous murder of his son!
                                  [Exit.


SCENE V. -- The Wilderness.  Enter EDITH.

EDITH.
How beautiful are these autumnal woods!
The wilderness doth blossom like the rose,
And change into a garden of the Lord!
How silent everywhere!  Alone and lost
Here in the forest, there comes over me
An inward awfulness.  I recall the words
Of the Apostle Paul: "In journeyings often,
Often in perils in the wilderness,
In weariness, in painfulness, in watchings,
In hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness;"
And I forget my weariness and pain,
My watchings, and my hunger and my thirst.
The Lord hath said that He will seek his flock
In cloudy and dark days, and they shall dwell
Securely in the wilderness, and sleep
Safe in the woods!  Whichever way I turn,
I come back with my face towards the town.
Dimly I see it, and the sea beyond it.
O cruel town!  I know what waits me there,
And yet I must go back; for ever louder
I hear the inward calling of the Spirit,
And must obey the voice.  O woods that wear
Your golden crown of martyrdom, blood-stained,
From you I learn a lesson of submission,
And am obedient even unto death,
If God so wills it.             [Exit.

JOHN ENDICOTT (within).
                 Edith! Edith! Edith!

He enters.

It is in vain!  I call, she answers not;
I follow, but I find no trace of her!
Blood! blood!  The leaves above me and around me
Are red with blood!  The pathways of the forest,
The clouds that canopy the setting sun
And even the little river in the meadows
Are stained with it!  Where'er I look, I see it!
Away, thou horrible vision!  Leave me! leave me!
Alas! you winding stream, that gropes its way
Through mist and shadow, doubling on itself,
At length will find, by the unerring law
Of nature, what it seeks.  O soul of man,
Groping through mist and shadow, and recoiling
Back on thyself, are, too, thy devious ways
Subject to law? and when thou seemest to wander
The farthest from thy goal, art thou still drawing
Nearer and nearer to it, till at length
Thou findest, like the river, what thou seekest?
                                   [Exit.


ACT V.

SCENE I. -- Daybreak.  Street in front of UPSALL's house. A light
in the window.  Enter JOHN ENDICOTT.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
O silent, sombre, and deserted streets,
To me ye 're peopled with a sad procession,
And echo only to the voice of sorrow!
O houses full of peacefulness and sleep,
Far better were it to awake no more
Than wake to look upon such scenes again!
There is a light in Master Upsall's window.
The good man is already risen, for sleep
Deserts the couches of the old.

Knocks at UPSALL's door.

UPSALL (at the window).
                        Who's there?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Am I so changed you do not know my voice?

UPSALL.
I know you.  Have you heard what things have happened?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
I have heard nothing.

UPSALL.
               Stay; I will come down.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
I am afraid some dreadful news awaits me!
I do not dare to ask, yet am impatient
To know the worst.  Oh, I am very weary
With waiting and with watching and pursuing!

Enter UPSALL.

UPSALL.
Thank God, you have come back!  I've much to tell you.
Where have you been?

JOHN ENDICOTT.
          You know that I was seized,
Fined, and released again.  You know that Edith,
After her scourging in three towns, was banished
Into the wilderness, into the land
That is not sown; and there I followed her,
But found her not.  Where is she?

UPSALL.
                          She is here.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Oh, do not speak that word, for it means death!

UPSALL.
No, it means life.  She sleeps in yonder chamber.
Listen to me.  When news of Leddra's death
Reached England, Edward Burroughs, having boldly
Got access to the presence of the King,
Told him there was a vein of innocent blood
Opened in his dominions here, which threatened
To overrun them all.  The King replied.
"But I will stop that vein!" and he forthwith
Sent his Mandamus to our Magistrates,
That they proceed no further in this business.
So all are pardoned, and all set at large.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
Thank God!  This is a victory for truth!
Our thoughts are free.  They cannot be shut up
In prison wall, nor put to death on scaffolds!

UPSALL.
Come in; the morning air blows sharp and cold
Through the damp streets.

JOHN ENDICOTT.
                It is the dawn of day
That chases the old darkness from our sky,
And tills the land with liberty and light.
                                 [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- The parlor of the Three Mariners.  Enter KEMPTHORN.

KEMPTHORN.
A dull life this,--a dull life anyway!
Ready for sea; the cargo all aboard,
Cleared for Barbadoes, and a fair wind blowing
From nor'-nor'-west; and I, an idle lubber,
Laid neck and heels by that confounded bond!
I said to Ralph, says I, "What's to be done?"
Says he: "Just slip your hawser in the night;
Sheer off, and pay it with the topsail, Simon."
But that won't do; because, you see, the owners
Somehow or other are mixed up with it.
Here are King Charles's Twelve Good Rules, that Cole
Thinks as important as the Rule of Three.

Reads.

"Make no comparisons; make no long meals."
Those are good rules and golden for a landlord
To hang in his best parlor, framed and glazed!
"Maintain no ill opinions; urge no healths."
I drink to the King's, whatever he may say
And, as to ill opinions, that depends.
Now of Ralph Goldsmith I've a good opinion,
And of the bilboes I've an ill opinion;
And both of these opinions I'll maintain
As long as there's a shot left in the locker.

Enter EDWARD BUTTER, with an ear-trumpet.

BUTTER.
Good morning, Captain Kempthorn.

KEMPTHORN.
                        Sir, to you.
You've the advantage of me.  I don't know you.
What may I call your name?

BUTTER.
              That's not your name?

KEMPTHORN.
Yes, that's my name.  What's yours?

BUTTER.
                 My name is Butter.
I am the treasurer of the Commonwealth.

KEMPTHORN.
Will you be seated?

BUTTER.
      What say?  Who's conceited?

KEMPTHORN.

Will you sit down?

BUTTER.
              Oh, thank you.

KEMPTHORN.
                      Spread yourself
Upon this chair, sweet Butter.

BUTTER (sitting down).
                       A fine morning.

KEMPTHORN.
Nothing's the matter with it that I know of.
I have seen better, and I have seen worse.
The wind's nor'west.  That's fair for them that sail.

BUTTER.
You need not speak so loud; I understand you.
You sail to-day.

KEMPTHORN.
                 No, I don't sail to-day.
So, be it fair or foul, it matters not.
Say, will you smoke?  There's choice tobacco here.

BUTTER.
No, thank you. It's against the law to smoke.

KEMPTHORN.
Then, will you drink?  There's good ale at this inn.

BUTTER.
No, thank you.  It's against the law to drink.

KEMPTHORN.
Well, almost everything's against the law
In this good town.  Give a wide berth to one thing,
You're sure to fetch up soon on something else.

BUTTER.
And so you sail to-day for dear Old England.
I am not one of those who think a sup
Of this New England air is better worth
Than a whole draught of our Old England's ale.

KEMPTHORN.
Nor I.  Give me the ale and keep the air.
But, as I said, I do not sail to-day.

BUTTER.
Ah yes; you sail today.

KEMPTHORN.
                    I'm under bonds
To take some Quakers back to the Barbadoes;
And one of them is banished, and another
Is sentenced to be hanged.

BUTTER.
                  No, all are pardoned,
All are set free by order of the Court;
But some of them would fain return to England.
You must not take them.  Upon that condition
Your bond is cancelled.

KEMPTHORN.
             Ah, the wind has shifted!
I pray you, do you speak officially?

BUTTER.
I always speak officially.  To prove it,
Here is the bond.

Rising and giving a paper.

KEMPTHORN.
          And here's my hand upon it,
And look you, when I say I'll do a thing
The thing is done.  Am I now free to go?

BUTTER.
What say?

KEMPTHORN.
     I say, confound the tedious man
With his strange speaking-trumpet!  Can I go?

BUTTER.
You're free to go, by order of the Court.
Your servant, sir.
                             [Exit.

KEMPTHORN (shouting from the window).
              Swallow, ahoy!  Hallo!
If ever a man was happy to leave Boston,
That man is Simon Kempthorn of the Swallow!

Re-enter BUTTER.

BUTTER.
Pray, did you call?

KEMPTHORN.
      Call!  Yes, I hailed the Swallow.

BUTTER.
That's not my name.  My name is Edward Butter.
You need not speak so loud.

KEMPTHORN (shaking hands).
                  Good-by!  Good-by!

BUTTER.
Your servant, sir.

KEMPTHORN.
        And yours a thousand times!
                           [Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- GOVERNOR ENDICOTT'S private room.  An open window.

ENDICOTT seated in an arm-chair.  BELLINGHAM standing near.

ENDICOTT.
O lost, O loved! wilt thou return no more?
O loved and lost, and loved the more when lost!
How many men are dragged into their graves
By their rebellious children!  I now feel
The agony of a father's breaking heart
In David's cry, "O Absalom, my son!"

BELLINGHAM.
Can you not turn your thoughts a little while
To public matters?  There are papers here
That need attention.

ENDICOTT.
                 Trouble me no more!
My business now is with another world,
Ah, Richard Bellingham!  I greatly fear
That in my righteous zeal I have been led
To doing many things which, left undone,
My mind would now be easier.  Did I dream it,
Or has some person told me, that John Norton
Is dead?

BELLINGHAM.
  You have not dreamed it.  He is dead,
And gone to his reward.  It was no dream.

ENDICOTT.
Then it was very sudden; for I saw him
Standing where you now stand, not long ago.

BELLINGHAM.
By his own fireside, in the afternoon,
A faintness and a giddiness came o'er him;
And, leaning on the chimney-piece, he cried,
"The hand of God is on me!" and fell dead.

ENDICOTT.
And did not some one say, or have I dreamed it,
That Humphrey Atherton is dead?

BELLINGHAM.
                               Alas!
He too is gone, and by a death as sudden.
Returning home one evening, at the place
Where usually the Quakers have been scourged,
His horse took fright, and threw him to the ground,
So that his brains were dashed about the street.

ENDICOTT.
I am not superstitions, Bellingham,
And yet I tremble lest it may have been
A judgment on him.

BELLINGHAM.
                 So the people think.
They say his horse saw standing in the way
The ghost of William Leddra, and was frightened.
And furthermore, brave Richard Davenport,
The captain of the Castle, in the storm
Has been struck dead by lightning.

ENDICOTT.
                       Speak no more.
For as I listen to your voice it seems
As if the Seven Thunders uttered their voices,
And the dead bodies lay about the streets
Of the disconsolate city!  Bellingham,
I did not put those wretched men to death.
I did but guard the passage with the sword
Pointed towards them, and they rushed upon it!
Yet now I would that I had taken no part
In all that bloody work.

BELLINGHAM.
                         The guilt of it
Be on their heads, not ours.

ENDICOTT.
                       Are all set free?

BELLINGHAM.
All are at large.

ENDICOTT.
        And none have been sent back
To England to malign us with the King?

BELLINGHAM.
The ship that brought them sails this very hour,
But carries no one back.

A distant cannon.

ENDICOTT.
                     What is that gun?

BELLINGHAM.
Her parting signal.  Through the window there,
Look, you can see her sails, above the roofs,
Dropping below the Castle, outward bound.

ENDICOTT.
O white, white, white!  Would that my soul had wings
As spotless as those shining sails to fly with!
Now lay this cushion straight.  I thank you.  Hark!
I thought I heard the hall door open and shut!
I thought I beard the footsteps of my boy!

BELLINGHAM.
It was the wind.  There's no one in the passage.

ENDICOTT.
O Absalom, my son!  I feel the world
Sinking beneath me, sinking, sinking, sinking!
Death knocks!  I go to meet him!  Welcome, Death!

Rises, and sinks back dead; his head failing aside upon his
shoulder.

BELLINGHAM.
O ghastly sight!  Like one who has been hanged!
Endicott!  Endicott!  He makes no answer!

Raises Endicott's head.

He breathes no more!  How bright this signet-ring
Glitters upon his hand, where he has worn it
Through such long years of trouble, as if Death
Had given him this memento of affection,
And whispered in his ear, "Remember me!"
How placid and how quiet is his face,
Now that the struggle and the strife are ended
Only the acrid spirit of the times
Corroded this true steel.  Oh, rest in peace,
Courageous heart!  Forever rest in peace!



GILES COREY OF THE SALEM FARMS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

GILES COREY             Farmer.
JOHN HATHORNE           Magistrate.
COTTON MATHER           Minister of the Gospel.
JONATHAN WALCOT         A youth.
RICHARD GARDNER         Sea-Captain.
JOHN GLOYD              Corey's hired man.
MARTHA                  Wife of Giles Corey.
TITUBA                  An Indian woman.
MARY WALCOT             One of the Afflicted.


The Scene is in Salem in the year 1692.

PROLOGUE.

Delusions of the days that once have been,
Witchcraft and wonders of the world unseen,
Phantoms of air, and necromantic arts
That crushed the weak and awed the stoutest hearts,--
These are our theme to-night; and vaguely here,
Through the dim mists that crowd the atmosphere,
We draw the outlines of weird figures cast
In shadow on the background of the Past,

Who would believe that in the quiet town
Of Salem, and, amid the woods that crown
The neighboring hillsides, and the sunny farms
That fold it safe in their paternal arms,--
Who would believe that in those peaceful streets,
Where the great elms shut out the summer heats,
Where quiet reigns, and breathes through brain and breast
The benediction of unbroken rest,--
Who would believe such deeds could find a place
As these whose tragic history we retrace?

'T was but a village then; the goodman ploughed
His ample acres under sun or cloud;
The goodwife at her doorstep sat and spun,
And gossiped with her neighbors in the sun;
The only men of dignity and state
Were then the Minister and the Magistrate,
Who ruled their little realm with iron rod,
Less in the love than in the fear of God;
And who believed devoutly in the Powers
Of Darkness, working in this world of ours,
In spells of Witchcraft, incantations dread,
And shrouded apparitions of the dead.

Upon this simple folk "with fire and flame,"
Saith the old chronicle, "the Devil came;
Scattering his firebrands and his poisonous darts,
To set on fire of Hell all tongues and hearts!
And 't is no wonder; for, with all his host,
There most he rages where he hateth most,
And is most hated; so on us he brings
All these stupendous and portentous things!"

Something of this our scene to-night will show;
And ye who listen to the Tale of Woe,
Be not too swift in casting the first stone,
Nor think New England bears the guilt alone,
This sudden burst of wickedness and crime
Was but the common madness of the time,
When in all lands, that lie within the sound
Of Sabbath bells, a Witch was burned or drowned.


ACT I.


SCENE I. -- The woods near Salem Village.  Enter TITUBA, with a
basket of herbs.

TITUBA.
Here's monk's-hood, that breeds fever in the blood;
And deadly nightshade, that makes men see ghosts;
And henbane, that will shake them with convulsions;
And meadow-saffron and black hellebore,
That rack the nerves, and puff the skin with dropsy;
And bitter-sweet, and briony, and eye-bright,
That cause eruptions, nosebleed, rheumatisms;
I know them, and the places where they hide
In field and meadow; and I know their secrets,
And gather them because they give me power
Over all men and women.  Armed with these,
I, Tituba, an Indian and a slave,
Am stronger than the captain with his sword,
Am richer than the merchant with his money,
Am wiser than the scholar with his books,
Mightier than Ministers and Magistrates,
With all the fear and reverence that attend them!
For I can fill their bones with aches and pains,
Can make them cough with asthma, shake with palsy,
Can make their daughters see and talk with ghosts,
Or fall into delirium and convulsions;
I have the Evil Eye, the Evil Hand;
A touch from me and they are weak with pain,
A look from me, and they consume and die.
The death of cattle and the blight of corn,
The shipwreck, the tornado, and the fire,--
These are my doings, and they know it not.
Thus I work vengeance on mine enemies
Who, while they call me slave, are slaves to me!

Exit TITUBA.  Enter MATHER, booted and spurred, with a
riding-whip in his hand.

MATHER.
Methinks that I have come by paths unknown
Into the land and atmosphere of Witches;
For, meditating as I journeyed on,
Lo! I have lost my way!  If I remember
Rightly, it is Scribonius the learned
That tells the story of a man who, praying
For one that was possessed by Evil Spirits,
Was struck by Evil Spirits in the face;
I, journeying to circumvent the Witches,
Surely by Witches have been led astray.
I am persuaded there are few affairs
In which the Devil doth not interfere.
We cannot undertake a journey even,
But Satan will be there to meddle with it
By hindering or by furthering.  He hath led me
Into this thicket, struck me in the face
With branches of the trees, and so entangled
The fetlocks of my horse with vines and brambles,
That I must needs dismount, and search on foot
For the lost pathway leading to the village.

Re-enter TITUBA.

What shape is this?  What monstrous apparition,
Exceeding fierce, that none may pass that way?
Tell me, good woman, if you are a woman--

TITUBA.
I am a woman, but I am not good,
I am a Witch!

MATHER.
      Then tell me, Witch and woman,
For you must know the pathways through this wood,
Where lieth Salem Village?

TITUBA.
                         Reverend sir,
The village is near by.  I'm going there
With these few herbs.  I'll lead you.  Follow me.

MATHER.
First say, who are you?  I am loath to follow
A stranger in this wilderness, for fear
Of being misled, and left in some morass.
Who are you?

TITUBA.
             I am Tituba the Witch,
Wife of John Indian.

MATHER.
                    You are Tituba?
I know you then.  You have renounced the Devil,
And have become a penitent confessor,
The Lord be praised!  Go on, I'll follow you.
Wait only till I fetch my horse, that stands
Tethered among the trees, not far from here.

TITUBA.
Let me get up behind you, reverend sir.

MATHER.
The Lord forbid!  What would the people think,
If they should see the Reverend Cotton Mather
Ride into Salem with a Witch behind him?
The Lord forbid!

TITUBA.
                 I do not need a horse!
I can ride through the air upon a stick,
Above the tree-tops and above the houses,
And no one see me, no one overtake me.
                          [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- A room at JUSTICE HATHORNE'S.  A clock in the
corner.
Enter HATHORNE and MATHER.

HATHORNE.
You are welcome, reverend sir, thrice welcome here
Beneath my humble roof.

MATHER.
              I thank your Worship.

HATHORNE.
Pray you be seated.  You must be fatigued
With your long ride through unfrequented woods.

They sit down.

MATHER.
You know the purport of my visit here,--
To be advised by you, and counsel with you,
And with the Reverend Clergy of the village,
Touching these witchcrafts that so much afflict you;
And see with mine own eyes the wonders told
Of spectres and the shadows of the dead,
That come back from their graves to speak with men.

HATHORNE.
Some men there are, I have known such, who think
That the two worlds--the seen and the unseen,
The world of matter and the world of spirit--
Are like the hemispheres upon our maps,
And touch each other only at a point.
But these two worlds are not divided thus,
Save for the purposes of common speech,
They form one globe, in which the parted seas
All flow together and are intermingled,
While the great continents remain distinct.

MATHER.
I doubt it not.  The spiritual world
Lies all about us, and its avenues
Are open to the unseen feet of phantoms
That come and go, and we perceive them not,
Save by their influence, or when at times
A most mysterious Providence permits them
To manifest themselves to mortal eyes.

HATHORNE.
You, who are always welcome here among us,
Are doubly welcome now.  We need your wisdom,
Your learning in these things to be our guide.
The Devil hath come down in wrath upon us,
And ravages the land with all his hosts.

MATHER.
The Unclean Spirit said, "My name is Legion!"
Multitudes in the Valley of Destruction!
But when our fervent, well-directed prayers,
Which are the great artillery of Heaven,
Are brought into the field, I see them scattered
And driven like autumn leaves before the wind.

HATHORNE.
You as a Minister of God, can meet them
With spiritual weapons: but, alas!
I, as a Magistrate, must combat them
With weapons from the armory of the flesh.

MATHER.
These wonders of the world invisible,--
These spectral shapes that haunt our habitations,--
The multiplied and manifold afflictions
With which the aged and the dying saints
Have their death prefaced and their age imbittered,--
Are but prophetic trumpets that proclaim
The Second Coming of our Lord on earth.
The evening wolves will be much more abroad,
When we are near the evening of the world.

HATHORNE.
When you shall see, as I have hourly seen,
The sorceries and the witchcrafts that torment us,
See children tortured by invisible spirits,
And wasted and consumed by powers unseen,
You will confess the half has not been told you.

MATHER.
It must be so.  The death-pangs of the Devil
Will make him more a Devil than before;
And Nebuchadnezzar's furnace will be heated
Seven times more hot before its putting out.

HATHORNE.
Advise me, reverend sir.  I look to you
For counsel and for guidance in this matter.
What further shall we do?

MATHER.
                       Remember this,
That as a sparrow falls not to the ground
Without the will of God, so not a Devil
Can come down from the air without his leave.
We must inquire.

HATHORNE.
           Dear sir, we have inquired;
Sifted the matter thoroughly through and through,
And then resifted it.

MATHER.
                      If God permits
These Evil Spirits from the unseen regions
To visit us with surprising informations,
We must inquire what cause there is for this,
But not receive the testimony borne
By spectres as conclusive proof of guilt
In the accused.

HATHORNE.
                Upon such evidence
We do not rest our case.  The ways are many
In which the guilty do betray themselves.

MATHER.
Be careful.  Carry the knife with such exactness,
That on one side no innocent blood be shed
By too excessive zeal, and on the other
No shelter given to any work of darkness.

HATHORNE.
For one, I do not fear excess of zeal.
What do we gain by parleying with the Devil?
You reason, but you hesitate to act!
Ah, reverend sir! believe me, in such cases
The only safety is in acting promptly.
'T is not the part of wisdom to delay
In things where not to do is still to do
A deed more fatal than the deed we shrink from.
You are a man of books and meditation,
But I am one who acts.

MATHER.
                 God give us wisdom
In the directing of this thorny business,
And guide us, lest New England should become
Of an unsavory and sulphurous odor
In the opinion of the world abroad!

The clock strikes.

I never hear the striking of a clock
Without a warning and an admonition
That time is on the wing, and we must quicken
Our tardy pace in journeying Heavenward,
As Israel did in journeying Canaan-ward!

They rise.

HATHORNE.
Then let us make all haste; and I will show you
In what disguises and what fearful shapes
The Unclean Spirits haunt this neighborhood,
And you will pardon my excess of zeal.

MATHER.
Ah, poor New England!  He who hurricanoed
The house of Job is making now on thee
One last assault, more deadly and more snarled
With unintelligible circumstances
Than any thou hast hitherto encountered!
                            [Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- A room in WALCOT'S House.  MARY WALCOT seated in an
arm-chair.  TITUBA with a mirror.

MARY.
Tell me another story, Tituba.
A drowsiness is stealing over me
Which is not sleep; for, though I close mine eyes,
I am awake, and in another world.
Dim faces of the dead and of the absent
Come floating up before me,--floating, fading,
And disappearing.

TITUBA.
                 Look into this glass.
What see you?

MARY.
          Nothing but a golden vapor.
Yes, something more.  An island, with the sea
Breaking all round it, like a blooming hedge.
What land is this?

TITUBA.
                  It is San Salvador,
Where Tituba was born.  What see you now?

MARY.
A man all black and fierce.

TITUBA.
                     That is my father.
He was an Obi man, and taught me magic,--
Taught me the use of herbs and images.
What is he doing?

MARY.
                Holding in his hand
A waxen figure.  He is melting it
Slowly before a fire.

TITUBA.
                 And now what see you?

MARY.
A woman lying on a bed of leaves,
Wasted and worn away.  Ah, she is dying!

TITUBA.
That is the way the Obi men destroy
The people they dislike!  That is the way
Some one is wasting and consuming you.

MARY.
You terrify me, Tituba!  Oh, save me
From those who make me pine and waste away!
Who are they?  Tell me.

TITUBA.
                 That I do not know,
But you will see them.  They will come to you.

MARY.
No, do not let them come!  I cannot bear it!
I am too weak to bear it!  I am dying.

Fails into a trance.

TITUBA.
Hark! there is some one coming!

Enter HATHORNE, MATHER, and WALCOT.

WALCOT.
                        There she lies,
Wasted and worn by devilish incantations!
O my poor sister!

MATHER.
                  Is she always thus?

WALCOT.
Nay, she is sometimes tortured by convulsions.

MATHER.
Poor child!  How thin she is!  How wan and wasted!

HATHORNE.
Observe her.  She is troubled in her sleep.

MATHER.
Some fearful vision haunts her.

HATHORNE.
                           You now see
With your own eyes, and touch with your own hands,
The mysteries of this Witchcraft.

MATHER.
                       One would need
The hands of Briareus and the eyes of Argus
To see and touch them all.

HATHORNE.
                You now have entered
The realm of ghosts and phantoms,--the vast realm
Of the unknown and the invisible,
Through whose wide-open gates there blows a wind
From the dark valley of the shadow of Death,
That freezes us with horror.

MARY (starting).
                      Take her hence!
Take her away from me.  I see her there!
She's coming to torment me!

WALCOT (taking her hand.
                         O my sister!
What frightens you?  She neither hears nor sees me.
She's in a trance.

MARY.
              Do you not see her there?

TITUBA.
My child, who is it?

MARY.
                    Ah, I do not know,
I cannot see her face.

TITUBA.
                      How is she clad?

MARY.
She wears a crimson bodice.  In her hand
She holds an image, and is pinching it
Between her fingers.  Ah, she tortures me!
I see her face now.  It is Goodwife Bishop!
Why does she torture me?  I never harmed her!
And now she strikes me with an iron rod!
Oh, I am beaten!

MATHER.
                 This is wonderful!.
I can see nothing!  Is this apparition
Visibly there, and yet we cannot see it?

HATHORNE.
It is.  The spectre is invisible
Unto our grosser senses, but she sees it.

MARY.
Look! look! there is another clad in gray!
She holds a spindle in her hand, and threatens
To stab me with it!  It is Goodwife Corey!
Keep her away!  Now she is coming at me!
Oh, mercy! mercy!

WALCOT (thrusting with his sword.
                There is nothing there!

MATHER to HATHORNE.
Do you see anything?

HATHORNE.
                 The laws that govern
The spiritual world prevent our seeing
Things palpable and visible to her.
These spectres are to us as if they were not.
Mark her; she wakes.

TITUBA touches her, and she awakes.

MARY.
            Who are these gentlemen?

WALCOT.
They are our friends.  Dear Mary, are you better?

MARY.
Weak, very weak.

Taking a spindle from her lap, and holding it up.

         How came this spindle here?

TITUBA.
You wrenched it from the hand of Goodwife Corey
When she rushed at you.

HATHORNE.
             Mark that, reverend sir!

MATHER.
It is most marvellous, most inexplicable!

TITUBA. (picking up a bit of gray cloth from the floor).
And here, too, is a bit of her gray dress,
That the sword cut away.

MATHER.
                      Beholding this,
It were indeed by far more credulous
To be incredulous than to believe.
None but a Sadducee, who doubts of all
Pertaining to the spiritual world,
Could doubt such manifest and damning proofs!

HATHORNE.
Are you convinced?

MATHER to MARY.
           Dear child, be comforted!
Only by prayer and fasting can you drive
These Unclean Spirits from you.  An old man
Gives you his blessing.  God be with you, Mary!


ACT II

SCENE I. -- GILES COREY's farm.  Morning.  Enter COREY, with a
horseshoe and a hammer.

COREY.
The Lord hath prospered me.  The rising sun
Shines on my Hundred Acres and my woods
As if he loved them.  On a morn like this
I can forgive mine enemies, and thank God
For all his goodness unto me and mine.
My orchard groans with russets and pearmains;
My ripening corn shines golden in the sun;
My barns are crammed with hay, my cattle thrive
The birds sing blithely on the trees around me!
And blither than the birds my heart within me.
But Satan still goes up and down the earth;
And to protect this house from his assaults,
And keep the powers of darkness from my door,
This horseshoe will I nail upon the threshold.

Nails down the horseshoe.

There, ye night-hags and witches that torment
The neighborhood, ye shall not enter here!--
What is the matter in the field?--John Gloyd!
The cattle are all running to the woods!--
John Gloyd!  Where is the man?

Enter JOHN GLOYD.
                         Look there!
What ails the cattle?  Are they all bewitched?
They run like mad.

GLOYD.
           They have been overlooked.

COREY.
The Evil Eye is on them sure enough.
Call all the men.  Be quick.  Go after them!

Exit GLOYD and enter MARTHA.

MARTHA.
What is amiss?

COREY.
            The cattle are bewitched.
They are broken loose and making for the woods.

MARTHA.
Why will you harbor such delusions, Giles?
Bewitched?  Well, then it was John Gloyd bewitched them;
I saw him even now take down the bars
And turn them loose!  They're only frolicsome.

COREY.
The rascal!

MARTHA.
           I was standing in the road,
Talking with Goodwife Proctor, and I saw him.

COREY.
With Proctor's wife?  And what says Goodwife Proctor?

MARTHA.
Sad things indeed; the saddest you can hear
Of Bridget Bishop.  She's cried out upon!

COREY.
Poor soul!  I've known her forty year or more.
She was the widow Wasselby, and then
She married Oliver, and Bishop next.
She's had three husbands.  I remember well
My games of shovel-board at Bishop's tavern
In the old merry days, and she so gay
With her red paragon bodice and her ribbons!
Ah, Bridget Bishop always was a Witch!

MARTHA.
They'll little help her now,--her caps and ribbons,
And her red paragon bodice and her plumes,
With which she flaunted in the Meeting-house!
When next she goes there, it will be for trial.

COREY.
When will that be?

MARTHA.
                This very day at ten.

COREY.
Then get you ready.  We'll go and see it.
Come; you shall ride behind me on the pillion.

MARTHA.
Not I.  You know I do not like such things.
I wonder you should.  I do not believe
In Witches nor in Witchcraft.

COREY.
                           Well, I do.
There's a strange fascination in it all.
That draws me on and on.  I know not why.

MARTHA.
What do we know of spirits good or ill,
Or of their power to help us or to harm us?

COREY.
Surely what's in the Bible must be true.
Did not an Evil Spirit come on Saul?
Did not the Witch of Endor bring the ghost
Of Samuel from his grave?  The Bible says so.

MARTHA.
That happened very long ago.

COREY.
                          With God
There is no long ago.

MARTHA.
                     There is with us.

COREY.
And Mary Magdalene had seven devils,
And he who dwelt among the tombs a legion!

MARTHA.
God's power is infinite.  I do not doubt it.
If in His providence He once permitted
Such things to be among the Israelites,
It does not follow He permits them now,
And among us who are not Israelites.
But we will not dispute about it, Giles.
Go to the village if you think it best,
And leave me here; I'll go about my work.
                  [Exit into the house.

COREY.
And I will go and saddle the gray mare.
The last word always.  That is woman's nature.
If an old man will marry a young wife,
He must make up his mind to many things.
It's putting new cloth into an old garment,
When the strain comes, it is the old gives way.

Goes to the door.

Oh, Martha!  I forgot to tell you something.
I've had a letter from a friend of mine,
A certain Richard Gardner of Nantucket,
Master and owner of a whaling-vessel;
He writes that he is coming down to see us.
I hope you'll like him.

MARTHA.
                     I will do my best.

COREY.
That's a good woman.  Now I will be gone.
I've not seen Gardner for this twenty year;
But there is something of the sea about him,--
Something so open, generous, large; and strong,
It makes me love him better than a brother.
                                     [Exit.

MARTHA comes to the door.

MARTHA.
Oh these old friends and cronies of my husband,
These captains from Nantucket and the Cape,
That come and turn my house into a tavern
With their carousing!  Still, there's something frank
In these seafaring men that makes me like them.
Why, here's a horseshoe nailed upon the doorstep!
Giles has done this to keep away the Witches.
I hope this Richard Gardner will bring him
A gale of good sound common-sense to blow
The fog of these delusions from his brain!

COREY (within).
Ho! Martha! Martha!

Enter COREY.
          Have you seen my saddle?

MARTHA.
I saw it yesterday.

COREY.
                 Where did you see it?

MARTHA.
On a gray mare, that somebody was riding
Along the village road.

COREY.
                Who was it?  Tell me.

MARTHA.
Some one who should have stayed at home.

COREY (restraining himself).
                            I see!
Don't vex me, Martha.  Tell me where it is.

MARTHA.
I've hidden it away.

COREY.
                     Go fetch it me.

MARTHA.
Go find it.

COREY.
     No.  I'll ride down to the village
Bareback; and when the people stare and say,
"Giles Corey, where's your saddle?" I will answer,
"A Witch has stolen it."  How shall you like that!

MARTHA.
I shall not like it.

COREY.
                Then go fetch the saddle.
                         [Exit MARTHA.

If an old man will marry a young wife,
Why then--why then--why then--he must spell Baker!

Enter MARTHA with the saddle, which she throws down.

MARTHA.
There!  There's the saddle.

COREY.
                  Take it up.

MARTHA.                             I won't!

COREY.
Then let it lie there.  I'll ride to the village,
And say you are a Witch.

MARTHA.
                   No, not that, Giles.

She takes up the saddle.

COREY.
Now come with me, and saddle the gray mare
With your own hands; and you shall see me ride
Along the village road as is becoming
Giles Corey of the Salem Farms, your husband!
                                  [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- The Green in front of the Meeting-house in Salem
village.  People coming and going.  Enter GILES COREY.

COREY.
A melancholy end!  Who would have thought
That Bridget Bishop e'er would come to this?
Accused, convicted, and condemned to death
For Witchcraft!  And so good a woman too!

A FARMER.
Good morrow, neighbor Corey.

COREY (not hearing him).
                        Who is safe?
How do I know but under my own roof
I too may harbor Witches, and some Devil
Be plotting and contriving against me?

FARMER.
He does not hear.  Good morrow, neighbor Corey!

COREY
Good morrow.

FARMER.
   Have you seen John Proctor lately?

COREY.
No, I have not.

FARMER.
           Then do not see him, Corey.

COREY.
Why should I not?

FARMER.
       Because he's angry with you.
So keep out of his way.  Avoid a quarrel.

COREY.
Why does he seek to fix a quarrel on me?

FARMER.
He says you burned his house.

COREY.
                    I burn his house?
If he says that, John Proctor is a liar!
The night his house was burned I was in bed,
And I can prove it!  Why, we are old friends!
He could not say that of me.

FARMER.
                         He did say it.
I heard him say it.

COREY.
                Then he shall unsay it.

FARMER.
He said you did it out of spite to him
For taking part against you in the quarrel
You had with your John Gloyd about his wages.
He says you murdered Goodell; that you trampled
Upon his body till he breathed no more.
And so beware of him; that's my advice!
                                  [Exit.

COREY.
By heaven! this is too much!  I'll seek him out,
And make him eat his words, or strangle him.
I'll not be slandered at a time like this,
When every word is made an accusation,
When every whisper kills, and every man
Walks with a halter round his neck!

Enter GLOYD in haste.

                           What now?
GLOYD.
I came to look for you.  The cattle--

COREY.
                                  Well,
What of them?  Have you found them?

GLOYD.
                   They are dead.
I followed them through the woods, across the meadows;
Then they all leaped into the Ipswich River,
And swam across, but could not climb the bank,
And so were drowned.

COREY.
            You are to blame for this;
For you took down the bars, and let them loose.

GLOYD.
That I deny.  They broke the fences down.
You know they were bewitched.

COREY.
                 Ah, my poor cattle!
The Evil Eye was on them; that is true.
Day of disaster!  Most unlucky day!
Why did I leave my ploughing and my reaping
To plough and reap this Sodom and Gomorrah?
Oh, I could drown myself for sheer vexation!
                                  [Exit.

GLOYD.
He's going for his cattle.  He won't find them.
By this time they have drifted out to sea.
They will not break his fences any more,
Though they may break his heart.  And what care I?
                                  [Exit.


SCENE III. -- COREY's kitchen.  A table with supper.  MARTHA
knitting.

MARTHA.

He's come at last.  I hear him in the passage.
Something has gone amiss with him today;
I know it by his step, and by the sound
The door made as he shut it.  He is angry.

Enter COREY with his riding-whip.  As he speaks he takes off his
hat and gloves and throws them down violently.

COREY.
I say if Satan ever entered man
He's in John Proctor!

MARTHA.
             Giles, what is the matter?
You frighten me.

COREY.
                 I say if any man
Can have a Devil in him, then that man
Is Proctor,--is John Proctor, and no other!

MARTHA.
Why, what has he been doing?

COREY.
                        Everything!
What do you think I heard there in the village?

MARTHA.
I'm sure I cannot guess.  What did you hear?

COREY.
He says I burned his house!

MARTHA.
                      Does he say that?

COREY.
He says I burned his house.  I was in bed
And fast asleep that night; and I can prove it.

MARTHA.
If he says that, I think the Father of Lies
Is surely in the man.

COREY.
                    He does say that
And that I did it to wreak vengeance on him
For taking sides against me in the quarrel
I had with that John Gloyd about his wages.
And God knows that I never bore him malice
For that, as I have told him twenty times

MARTHA.
It is John Gloyd has stirred him up to this.
I do not like that Gloyd.  I think him crafty,
Not to be trusted, sullen and untruthful.
Come, have your supper.  You are tired and hungry.

COREY.
I'm angry, and not hungry.

MARTHA.
                     Do eat something.
You'll be the better for it.

COREY (sitting down).
                       I'm not hungry.

MARTHA.
Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.

COREY.
It has gone down upon it, and will rise
To-morrow, and go down again upon it.
They have trumped up against me the old story
Of causing Goodell's death by trampling on him.

MARTHA.
Oh, that is false.  I know it to be false.

COREY.
He has been dead these fourteen years or more.
Why can't they let him rest?  Why must they drag him
Out of his grave to give me a bad name?
I did not kill him.  In his bed he died,
As most men die, because his hour had come.
I have wronged no man.  Why should Proctor say
Such things bout me?  I will not forgive him
Till he confesses he has slandered me.
Then, I've more trouble.  All my cattle gone.

MARTHA.
They will come back again.

COREY.
                    Not in this world.
Did I not tell you they were overlooked?
They ran down through the woods, into the meadows,
And tried to swim the river, and were drowned.
It is a heavy loss.

MARTHA.
                   I'm sorry for it.

COREY.
All my dear oxen dead.  I loved them, Martha,
Next to yourself.  I liked to look at them,
And watch the breath come out of their wide nostrils,
And see their patient eyes.  Somehow I thought
It gave me strength only to look at them.
And how they strained their necks against the yoke
If I but spoke, or touched them with the goad!
They were my friends; and when Gloyd came and told me
They were all drowned, I could have drowned myself
From sheer vexation; and I said as much
To Gloyd and others.

MARTHA.
              Do not trust John Gloyd
With anything you would not have repeated.

COREY.
As I came through the woods this afternoon,
Impatient at my loss, and much perplexed
With all that I had heard there in the village,
The yellow leaves lit up the trees about me
Like an enchanted palace, and I wished
I knew enough of magic or of Witchcraft
To change them into gold.  Then suddenly
A tree shook down some crimson leaves upon me,
Like drops of blood, and in the path before me
Stood Tituba the Indian, the old crone.

MARTHA.
Were you not frightened?

COREY.
                    No, I do not think
I know the meaning of that word.  Why frightened?
I am not one of those who think the Lord
Is waiting till He catches them some day
In the back yard alone!  What should I fear?
She started from the bushes by the path,
And had a basket full of herbs and roots
For some witch-broth or other,--the old hag.

MARTHA.
She has been here to-day.

COREY.
                With hand outstretched
She said: "Giles Corey, will you sign the Book?"
"Avaunt!" I cried: "Get thee behind me, Satan!"
At which she laughed and left me.  But a voice
Was whispering in my ear continually:
"Self-murder is no crime.  The life of man
Is his, to keep it or to throw away!"

MARTHA.
'T was a temptation of the Evil One!
Giles, Giles! why will you harbor these dark thoughts?

COREY (rising).
I am too tired to talk.  I'll go to bed.

MARTHA.
First tell me something about Bridget Bishop.
How did she look?  You saw her?  You were there?

COREY.
I'll tell you that to-morrow, not to-night.
I'll go to bed.

MARTHA.
               First let us pray together.

COREY.
I cannot pray to-night.

MARTHA.
                Say the Lord's Prayer,
And that will comfort you.

COREY.
                          I cannot say,
"As we forgive those that have sinned against us,"
When I do not forgive them.

MARTHA (kneeling on the hearth).
                     God forgive you!

COREY.
I will not make believe!  I say to-night
There's something thwarts me when I wish to pray,
And thrusts into my mind, instead of prayers,
Hate and revenge, and things that are not prayers.
Something of my old self,--my old, bad life,--
And the old Adam in me rises up,
And will not let me pray.  I am afraid
The Devil hinders me.  You know I say
Just what I think, and nothing more nor less,
And, when I pray, my heart is in my prayer.
I cannot say one thing and mean another.
If I can't pray, I will not make believe!

[Exit COREY.  MARTHA continues kneeling.


ACT III.

SCENE I. -- GILES COREY'S kitchen.  Morning.  COREY and MARTHA
sitting at the breakfast-table.

COREY (rising).
Well, now I've told you all I saw and heard
Of Bridget Bishop; and I must be gone.

MARTHA.
Don't go into the village, Giles, to-day.
Last night you came back tired and out of humor.

COREY.
Say, angry; say, right angry.  I was never
In a more devilish temper in my life.
All things went wrong with me.

MARTHA.
                You were much vexed;
So don't go to the village.

COREY (going).
                            No, I won't.
I won't go near it.  We are going to mow
The Ipswich meadows for the aftermath,
The crop of sedge and rowens.

MARTHA.
                       Stay a moment,
I want to tell you what I dreamed last night.
Do you believe in dreams?

COREY.
                     Why, yes and no.
When they come true, then I believe in them
When they come false, I don't believe in them.
But let me hear.  What did you dream about?

MARTHA.
I dreamed that you and I were both in prison;
That we had fetters on our hands and feet;
That we were taken before the Magistrates,
And tried for Witchcraft, and condemned to death!
I wished to pray; they would not let me pray;
You tried to comfort me, and they forbade it.
But the most dreadful thing in all my dream
Was that they made you testify against me!
And then there came a kind of mist between us;
I could not see you; and I woke in terror.
I never was more thankful in my life
Than when I found you sleeping at my side!

COREY (with tenderness).
It was our talk last night that made you dream.
I'm sorry for it.  I'll control myself
Another time, and keep my temper down!
I do not like such dreams.--Remember, Martha,
I'm going to mow the Ipswich River meadows;
If Gardner comes, you'll tell him where to find me.
                                    [Exit.

MARTHA.
So this delusion grows from bad to worse
First, a forsaken and forlorn old woman,
Ragged and wretched, and without a friend;
Then something higher.  Now it's Bridget Bishop;
God only knows whose turn it will be next!
The Magistrates are blind, the people mad!
If they would only seize the Afflicted Children,
And put them in the Workhouse, where they should be,
There'd be an end of all this wickedness.
                                   [Exit.


SCENE II. -- A street in Salem Village.  Enter MATHER and
HATHORNE.

MATHER.
Yet one thing troubles me.

HATHORNE.
                      And what is that?

MATHER.
May not the Devil take the outward shape
Of innocent persons?  Are we not in danger,
Perhaps, of punishing some who are not guilty?

HATHORNE.
As I have said, we do not trust alone
To spectral evidence.

MATHER.
                      And then again,
If any shall be put to death for Witchcraft,
We do but kill the body, not the soul.
The Unclean Spirits that possessed them once
Live still, to enter into other bodies.
What have we gained?  Surely, there's nothing gained.

HATHORNE.
Doth not the Scripture say, "Thou shalt not suffer
A Witch to live"?

MATHER.
              The Scripture sayeth it,
But speaketh to the Jews; and we are Christians.
What say the laws of England?

HATHORNE.
                They make Witchcraft
Felony without the benefit of Clergy.
Witches are burned in England.  You have read--
For you read all things, not a book escapes you--
The famous Demonology of King James?

MATHER.
A curious volume.  I remember also
The plot of the Two Hundred, with one Fian,
The Registrar of the Devil, at their head,
To drown his Majesty on his return
From Denmark; how they sailed in sieves or riddles
Unto North Berwick Kirk in Lothian,
And, landing there, danced hand in hand, and sang,
"Goodwife, go ye before! good wife, go ye!
If ye'll not go before, goodwife, let me!"
While Geilis Duncan played the Witches' Reel
Upon a jews-harp.

HATHORNE.
             Then you know full well
The English law, and that in England Witches,
When lawfully convicted and attainted,
Are put to death.

MATHER.
             When lawfully convicted;
That is the point.

HATHORNE.
                You heard the evidence
Produced before us yesterday at the trial
Of Bridget Bishop.

MATHER.
                  One of the Afflicted,
I know, bore witness to the apparition
Of ghosts unto the spectre of this Bishop,
Saying, "You murdered us!" of the truth whereof
There was in matter of fact too much Suspicion.

HATHORNE.
And when she cast her eyes on the Afflicted,
They were struck down; and this in such a manner
There could be no collusion in the business.
And when the accused but laid her hand upon them,
As they lay in their swoons, they straight revived,
Although they stirred not when the others touched them.


MATHER.
What most convinced me of the woman's guilt
Was finding hidden in her cellar wall
Those poppets made of rags, with headless pins
Stuck into them point outwards, and whereof
She could not give a reasonable account.

HATHORNE.
When you shall read the testimony given
Before the Court in all the other cases,
I am persuaded you will find the proof
No less conclusive than it was in this.
Come, then, with me, and I will tax your patience
With reading of the documents so far
As may convince you that these sorcerers
Are lawfully convicted and attainted.
Like doubting Thomas, you shall lay your hand
Upon these wounds, and you will doubt no more.
                             {Exeunt.


SCENE III. -- A room in COREY's house.  MARTHA and two Deacons of
the church.


MARTHA.
Be seated.  I am glad to see you here.
I know what you are come for.  You are come
To question me, and learn from my own lips
If I have any dealings with the Devil;
In short, if I'm a Witch.

DEACON (sitting down).
                   Such is our purpose.
How could you know beforehand why we came?

MARTHA.
'T was only a surmise.

DEACON.
                  We came to ask you,
You being with us in church covenant,
What part you have, if any, in these matters.

MARTHA.
And I make answer, No part whatsoever.
I am a farmer's wife, a working woman;
You see my spinning-wheel, you see my loom,
You know the duties of a farmer's wife,
And are not ignorant that my life among you
Has been without reproach until this day.
Is it not true?

DEACON.
         So much we're bound to own,
And say it frankly, and without reserve.

MARTHA.
I've heard the idle tales that are abroad;
I've heard it whispered that I am a Witch;
I cannot help it.  I do not believe
In any Witchcraft.  It is a delusion.

DEACON.
How can you say that it is a delusion,
When all our learned and good men believe it,--
Our Ministers and worshipful Magistrates?

MARTHA.
Their eyes are blinded and see not the truth.
Perhaps one day they will be open to it.

DEACON.
You answer boldly.  The Afflicted Children
Say you appeared to them.

MARTHA.
                     And did they say
What clothes I came in?

DEACON.
               No, they could not tell.
They said that you foresaw our visit here,
And blinded them, so that they could not see
The clothes you wore.

MARTHA.
             The cunning, crafty girls!
I say to you, in all sincerity,
I never have appeared to anyone
In my own person.  If the Devil takes
My shape to hurt these children, or afflict them,
I am not guilty of it.  And I say
It's all a mere delusion of the senses.

DEACON.
I greatly fear that you will find too late
It is not so.

MARTHA (rising).
             They do accuse me falsely.
It is delusion, or it is deceit.
There is a story in the ancient Scriptures
Which I much wonder comes not to your minds.
Let me repeat it to you.

DEACON.
                        We will hear it.

MARTHA.
It came to pass that Naboth had a vineyard
Hard by the palace of the King called Ahab.
And Ahab, King of Israel, spake to Naboth,
And said to him, Give unto me thy vineyard,
That I may have it for a garden of herbs,
And I will give a better vineyard for it,
Or, if it seemeth good to thee, its worth
In money.  And then Naboth said to Ahab,
The Lord forbid it me that I should give
The inheritance of my fathers unto thee.
And Ahab came into his house displeased
And heavy at the words which Naboth spake,
And laid him down upon his bed, and turned
His face away; and he would eat no bread.
And Jezebel, the wife of Ahab, came
And said to him, Why is thy spirit sad?
And he said unto her, Because I spake
To Naboth, to the Jezreelite, and said,
Give me thy vineyard; and he answered, saying,
I will not give my vineyard unto thee.
And Jezebel, the wife of Ahab, said,
Dost thou not rule the realm of Israel?
Arise, eat bread, and let thy heart be merry;
I will give Naboth's vineyard unto thee.
So she wrote letters in King Ahab's name,
And sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters
Unto the elders that were in his city
Dwelling with Naboth, and unto the nobles;
And in the letters wrote, Proclaim a fast;
And set this Naboth high among the people,
And set two men, the sons of Belial,
Before him, to bear witness and to say,
Thou didst blaspheme against God and the King;
And carry him out and stone him, that he die!
And the elders and the nobles in the city
Did even as Jezebel, the wife of Ahab,
Had sent to them and written in the letters.

And then it came to pass, when Ahab heard
Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose to go
Down unto Naboth's vineyard, and to take
Possession of it.  And the word of God
Came to Elijah, saying to him, Arise,
Go down to meet the King of Israel
In Naboth's vineyard, whither he hath gone
To take possession.  Thou shalt speak to him,
Saying, Thus saith the Lord!  What! hast thou killed
And also taken possession?  In the place
Wherein the dogs have licked the blood of Naboth
Shall the dogs lick thy blood,--ay, even thine!

Both of the Deacons start from their seats.

And Ahab then, the King of Israel,
Said, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?
Elijah the Prophet answered, I have found thee!
So will it be with those who have stirred up
The Sons of Belial here to bear false witness
And swear away the lives of innocent people;
Their enemy will find them out at last,
The Prophet's voice will thunder, I have found thee!
                                [Exeunt.


SCENE IV. -- Meadows on Ipswich River, COREY and his men mowing;
COREY in advance.

COREY.
Well done, my men.  You see, I lead the field!
I'm an old man, but I can swing a scythe
Better than most of you, though you be younger.

Hangs his scythe upon a tree.

GLOYD (aside to the others).
How strong he is!  It's supernatural.
No man so old as he is has such strength.
The Devil helps him!

COREY (wiping his forehead).
                 Now we'll rest awhile,
And take our nooning.  What's the matter with you?
You are not angry with me,--are you, Gloyd?
Come, come, we will not quarrel.  Let's be friends.
It's an old story, that the Raven said,
"Read the Third of Colossians and fifteenth."

GLOYD.
You're handier at the scythe, but I can beat you
At wrestling.

COREY.
      Well, perhaps so.  I don't know.
I never wrestled with you.  Why, you're vexed!
Come, come, don't bear a grudge.

GLOYD.
                  You are afraid.

COREY.
What should I be afraid of?  All bear witness
The challenge comes from him.  Now, then, my man.

They wrestle, and GLOYD is thrown.

ONE OF THE MEN.
That's a fair fall.

ANOTHER.
              'T was nothing but a foil!

OTHERS.
You've hurt him!

COREY (helping GLOYD rise).
        No; this meadow-land is soft.
You're not hurt,--are you, Gloyd?

GLOYD (rising).
                No, not much hurt.

COREY.
Well, then, shake hands; and there's an end of it.
How do you like that Cornish hug, my lad?
And now we'll see what's in our basket here.

GLOYD (aside).
The Devil and all his imps are in that man!
The clutch of his ten fingers burns like fire!

COREY (reverentially taking off his hat).
God bless the food He hath provided for us,
And make us thankful for it, for Christ's sake!

He lifts up a keg of cider, and drinks from it.

GLOYD.
Do you see that?  Don't tell me it's not Witchcraft
Two of us could not lift that cask as he does!

COREY puts down the keg, and opens a basket.  A voice is heard
calling.

VOICE.
Ho! Corey, Corey!

COREY.
              What is that?  I surely
Heard some one calling me by name!

VOICE.
                         Giles Corey!

Enter a boy, running, and out of breath.

BOY.
Is Master Corey here?

COREY.
                      Yes, here I am.
BOY.
O Master Corey!

COREY.
               Well?

BOY.
                 Your wife--your wife--

COREY.
What's happened to my wife?

BOY.
                 She's sent to prison!

COREY.
The dream! the dream!  O God, be merciful!

BOY.
She sent me here to tell you.

COREY (putting on his jacket).
                   Where's my horse?
Don't stand there staring, fellows.
Where's my horse?
                 [Exit COREY.

GLOYD.
Under the trees there.  Run, old man, run, run!
You've got some one to wrestle with you now
Who'll trip your heels up, with your Cornish hug.
If there's a Devil, he has got you now.
Ah, there he goes!  His horse is snorting fire!

ONE OF THE MEN.
John Gloyd, don't talk so!  It's a shame to talk so!
He's a good master, though you quarrel with him.

GLOYD.
If hard work and low wages make good masters,
Then he is one.  But I think otherwise.
Come, let us have our dinner and be merry,
And talk about the old man and the Witches.
I know some stories that will make you laugh.

They sit down on the grass, and eat.

Now there are Goody Cloyse and Goody Good,
Who have not got a decent tooth between them,
And yet these children--the Afflicted Children--
Say that they bite them, and show marks of teeth
Upon their arms!

ONE OF THE MEN.
      That makes the wonder greater.
That's Witchcraft.  Why, if they had teeth like yours,
'T would be no wonder if the girls were bitten!

GLOYD.
And then those ghosts that come out of their graves
And cry, "You murdered us! you murdered us!"

ONE OF THE MEN.
And all those Apparitions that stick pins
Into the flesh of the Afflicted Children!

GLOYD.
Oh those Afflicted Children!  They know well
Where the pins come from.  I can tell you that.
And there's old Corey, he has got a horseshoe
Nailed on his doorstep to keep off the Witches,
And all the same his wife has gone to prison.

ONE OF THE MEN.
Oh, she's no Witch.  I'll swear that Goodwife Corey
Never did harm to any living creature.
She's a good woman, if there ever was one.

GLOYD.
Well, we shall see.  As for that Bridget Bishop,
She has been tried before; some years ago
A negro testified he saw her shape
Sitting upon the rafters in a barn,
And holding in its hand an egg; and while
He went to fetch his pitchfork, she had vanished.
And now be quiet, will you?  I am tired,
And want to sleep here on the grass a little.

They stretch themselves on the grass.

ONE OF THE MEN.
There may be Witches riding through the air
Over our heads on broomsticks at this moment,
Bound for some Satan's Sabbath in the woods
To be baptized.

GLOYD.
   I wish they'd take you with them,
And hold you under water, head and ears,
Till you were drowned; and that would stop your talking,
If nothing else will.  Let me sleep, I say.


ACT IV

SCENE I. -- The Green in front of the village Meeting-house.  An
excited crowd gathering.  Enter JOHN GLOYD.

A FARMER.
Who will be tried to-day?

A SECOND.
                       I do not know.
Here is John Gloyd.  Ask him; he knows.

FARMER.
                       John Gloyd,
Whose turn is it to-day?

GLOYD.
                 It's Goodwife Corey's.

FARMER.
Giles Corey's wife?

GLOYD.
           The same.  She is not mine.
It will go hard with her with all her praying.
The hypocrite!  She's always on her knees;
But she prays to the Devil when she prays.
Let us go in.

A trumpet blows.

FARMER.
            Here come the Magistrates.

SECOND FARMER.
Who's the tall man in front?

GLOYD.
                 Oh, that is Hathorne,
A Justice of the Court, and a Quarter-master
In the Three County Troop.  He'll sift the matter.
That's Corwin with him; and the man in black
Is Cotton Mather, Minister of Boston.

Enter HATHORNE and other Magistrates on horseback, followed by
the Sheriff, constables, and attendants on foot.  The Magistrates
dismount, and enter the Meeting-house, with the rest.

FARMER.

The Meeting-house is full.  I never saw
So great a crowd before.

GLOYD.
                    No matter.  Come.
We shall find room enough by elbowing
Our way among them.  Put your shoulder to it.

FARMER.
There were not half so many at the trial
Of Goodwife Bishop.

GLOYD.
                  Keep close after me.
I'll find a place for you.  They'll want me there.
I am a friend of Corey's, as you know,
And he can't do without me just at present.
                          [Exeunt.


SCENE II. -- Interior of the Meeting-house.  MATHER and the
Magistrates seated in front of the pulpit.  Before them a raised
platform.  MARTHA in chains.  COREY near her.  MARY WALCOT in a
chair.  A crowd of spectators, among them GLOYD.  Confusion and
murmurs during the scene.

HATHORNE.
Call Martha Corey.

MARTHA.
             I am here.

HATHORNE.
                        Come forward.

She ascends the platform.

The Jurors of our Sovereign Lord and Lady
The King and Queen, here present, do accuse you
Of having on the tenth of June last past,
And divers other times before and after,
Wickedly used and practised certain arts
Called Witchcrafts, Sorceries, and Incantations,
Against one Mary Walcot, single woman,
Of Salem Village; by which wicked arts
The aforesaid Mary Walcot was tormented,
Tortured, afflicted, pined, consumed, and wasted,
Against the peace of our Sovereign Lord and Lady
The King and Queen, as well as of the Statute
Made and provided in that case.  What say you?

MARTHA.
Before I answer, give me leave to pray.

HATHORNE.
We have not sent for you, nor are we here,
To hear you pray, but to examine you
In whatsoever is alleged against you.
Why do you hurt this person?

MARTHA.
                            I do not.
I am not guilty of the charge against me.

MARY.
Avoid, she-devil!  You may torment me now!
Avoid, avoid, Witch!

MARTHA.
                    I am innocent.
I never had to do with any Witchcraft
Since I was born.  I am a gospel woman.

MARY.
You are a gospel Witch!

MARTHA (clasping her hands).
                      Ah me! ah me!
Oh, give me leave to pray!

MARY (stretching out her hands).
                     She hurts me now.
See, she has pinched my hands!

HATHORNE.
              Who made these marks
Upon her hands?

MARTHA.
              I do not know.  I stand
Apart from her.  I did not touch her hands.

HATHORNE.
Who hurt her then?

MARTHA.
             I know not.

HATHORNE.
                       Do you think
She is bewitched?

MARTHA.
              Indeed I do not think so.
I am no Witch, and have no faith in Witches.

HATHORNE.
Then answer me: When certain persons came
To see you yesterday, how did you know
Beforehand why they came?

MARTHA.
                    I had had speech;
The children said I hurt them, and I thought
These people came to question me about it.

HATHORNE.
How did you know the children had been told
To note the clothes you wore?

MARTHA.
                    My husband told me
What others said about it.

HATHORNE.
                     Goodman Corey,
Say, did you tell her?

COREY.
                I must speak the truth;
I did not tell her.  It was some one else.

HATHORNE.
Did you not say your husband told you so?
How dare you tell a lie in this assembly?
Who told you of the clothes?  Confess the truth.

MARTHA bites her lips, and is silent.

You bite your lips, but do not answer me!

MARY.
Ah, she is biting me!  Avoid, avoid!

HATHORNE.
You said your husband told you.

MARTHA.
                      Yes, he told me
The children said I troubled them.

HATHORNE.
                         Then tell me,
Why do you trouble them?

MARTHA.
                    I have denied it.

MARY.
She threatened me; stabbed at me with her spindle;
And, when my brother thrust her with his sword,
He tore her gown, and cut a piece away.
Here are they both, the spindle and the cloth.

Shows them.

HATHORNE.
And there are persons here who know the truth
Of what has now been said.  What answer make you?

MARTHA.
I make no answer.  Give me leave to pray.

HATHORNE.
Whom would you pray to?

MARTHA.
            To my God and Father.

HATHORNE.
Who is your God and Father?

MARTHA.
                     The Almighty!

HATHORNE.
Doth he you pray to say that he is God?
It is the Prince of Darkness, and not God.

MARY.
There is a dark shape whispering in her ear.

HATHORNE.
What does it say to you?

MARTHA.
                       I see no shape.

HATHORNE.
Did you not hear it whisper?

MARTHA.
                      I heard nothing.

MARY.
What torture!  Ah, what agony I suffer!

Falls into a swoon.

HATHORNE.
You see this woman cannot stand before you.
If you would look for mercy, you must look
In God's way, by confession of your guilt.
Why does your spectre haunt and hurt this person?

MARTHA.
I do not know.  He who appeared of old
In Samuel's shape, a saint and glorified,
May come in whatsoever shape he chooses.
I cannot help it.  I am sick at heart!

COREY.
O Martha, Martha! let me hold your hand.

HATHORNE.
No; stand aside, old man.

MARY (starting up).
                Look there!  Look there!
I see a little bird, a yellow bird
Perched on her finger; and it pecks at me.
Ah, it will tear mine eyes out!

MARTHA.
                           I see nothing.

HATHORNE.
'T is the Familiar Spirit that attends her.

MARY.
Now it has flown away.  It sits up there
Upon the rafters.  It is gone; is vanished.

MARTHA.
Giles, wipe these tears of anger from mine eyes.
Wipe the sweat from my forehead.  I am faint.

She leans against the railing.

MARY.
Oh, she is crushing me with all her weight!

HATHORNE.
Did you not carry once the Devil's Book
To this young woman?

MARTHA.
               Never.

HATHORNE.
                 Have you signed it,
Or touched it?

MARTHA.
              No; I never saw it.

HATHORNE.
Did you not scourge her with an iron rod?

MARTHA.
No, I did not.  If any Evil Spirit
Has taken my shape to do these evil deeds,
I cannot help it.  I am innocent.

HATHORNE.
Did you not say the Magistrates were blind?
That you would open their eyes?

MARTHA (with a scornful laugh).
                      Yes, I said that;
If you call me a sorceress, you are blind!
If you accuse the innocent, you are blind!
Can the innocent be guilty?

HATHORNE.
                           Did you not
On one occasion hide your husband's saddle
To hinder him from coming to the sessions?

MARTHA.
I thought it was a folly in a farmer
To waste his time pursuing such illusions.

HATHORNE.
What was the bird that this young woman saw
Just now upon your hand?

MARTHA.
                      I know no bird.

HATHORNE.
Have you not dealt with a Familiar Spirit?

MARTHA.
No, never, never!

HATHORNE.
               What then was the Book
You showed to this young woman, and besought her
To write in it?

MARTHA.
          Where should I have a book?
I showed her none, nor have none.

MARY.
                     The next Sabbath
Is the Communion Day, but Martha Corey
Will not be there!

MARTHA.
           Ah, you are all against me.
What can I do or say?

HATHORNE.
                    You can confess.

MARTHA.
No, I cannot, for I am innocent.

HATHORNE.
We have the proof of many witnesses
That you are guilty.

MARTHA.
             Give me leave to speak.
Will you condemn me on such evidence,--
You who have known me for so many years?
Will you condemn me in this house of God,
Where I so long have worshipped with you all?
Where I have eaten the bread and drunk the wine
So many times at our Lord's Table with you?
Bear witness, you that hear me; you all know
That I have led a blameless life among you,
That never any whisper of suspicion
Was breathed against me till this accusation.
And shall this count for nothing?  Will you take
My life away from me, because this girl,
Who is distraught, and not in her right mind,
Accuses me of things I blush to name?

HATHORNE.
What! is it not enough?  Would you hear more?
Giles Corey!

COREY.
             I am here.

HATHORNE.
                  Come forward, then.

COREY ascends the platform.

Is it not true, that on a certain night
You were impeded strangely in your prayers?
That something hindered you? and that you left
This woman here, your wife, kneeling alone
Upon the hearth?

COREY.
               Yes; I cannot deny it.

HATHORNE.
Did you not say the Devil hindered you?

COREY.
I think I said some words to that effect.

HATHORNE.
Is it not true, that fourteen head of cattle,
To you belonging, broke from their enclosure
And leaped into the river, and were drowned?

COREY.
It is most true.

HATHORNE.
               And did you not then say
That they were overlooked?

COREY.
                      So much I said.
I see; they're drawing round me closer, closer,
A net I cannot break, cannot escape from! (Aside).

HATHORNE.
Who did these things?

COREY.
         I do not know who did them.

HATHORNE.
Then I will tell you.  It is some one near you;
You see her now; this woman, your own wife.

COREY.
I call the heavens to witness, it is false!
She never harmed me, never hindered me
In anything but what I should not do.
And I bear witness in the sight of heaven,
And in God's house here, that I never knew her
As otherwise than patient, brave, and true,
Faithful, forgiving, full of charity,
A virtuous and industrious and good wife!

HATHORNE.
Tut, tut, man; do not rant so in your speech;
You are a witness, not an advocate!
Here, Sheriff, take this woman back to prison.

MARTHA.
O Giles, this day you've sworn away my life!

MARY.
Go, go and join the Witches at the door.
Do you not hear the drum?  Do you not see them?
Go quick.  They're waiting for you.  You are late.
[Exit MARTHA; COREY following.

COREY.
The dream! the dream! the dream!

HATHORNE.
                  What does he say?
Giles Corey, go not hence.  You are yourself
Accused of Witchcraft and of Sorcery
By many witnesses.  Say, are you guilty?

COREY.
I know my death is foreordained by you,
Mine and my wife's.  Therefore I will not answer.

During the rest of the scene he remains silent.

HATHORNE.
Do you refuse to plead?--'T were better for you
To make confession, or to plead Not Guilty.--
Do you not hear me?--Answer, are you guilty?
Do you not know a heavier doom awaits you,
If you refuse to plead, than if found guilty?
Where is John Gloyd?

GLOYD (coming forward).
               Here am I.

HATHORNE.
                     Tell the Court
Have you not seen the supernatural power
Of this old man?  Have you not seen him do
Strange feats of strength?

GLOYD.
            I've seen him lead the field,
On a hot day, in mowing, and against
Us younger men; and I have wrestled with him.
He threw me like a feather.  I have seen him
Lift up a barrel with his single hands,
Which two strong men could hardly lift together,
And, holding it above his head, drink from it.

HATHORNE.
That is enough; we need not question further.
What answer do you make to this, Giles Corey?

MARY.
See there!  See there!

HATHORNE.
           What is it?  I see nothing.

MARY.
Look! Look!  It is the ghost of Robert Goodell,
Whom fifteen years ago this man did murder
By stamping on his body!  In his shroud
He comes here to bear witness to the crime!

The crowd shrinks back from COREY in horror.

HATHORNE.
Ghosts of the dead and voices of the living
Bear witness to your guilt, and you must die!
It might have been an easier death.  Your doom
Will be on your own head, and not on ours.
Twice more will you be questioned of these things;
Twice more have room to plead or to confess.
If you are contumacious to the Court,
And if, when questioned, you refuse to answer,
Then by the Statute you will be condemned
To the peine forte et dure!  To have your body
Pressed by great weights until you shall be dead!
And may the Lord have mercy on your soul!


ACT V.

SCENE I. -- COREy's farm as in Act II., Scene I.  Enter RICHARD
GARDNER, looking round him.

GARDNER.
Here stands the house as I remember it.
The four tall poplar-trees before the door;
The house, the barn, the orchard, and the well,
With its moss-covered bucket and its trough;
The garden, with its hedge of currant-bushes;
The woods, the harvest-fields; and, far beyond,
The pleasant landscape stretching to the sea.
But everything is silent and deserted!
No bleat of flocks, no bellowing of herds,
No sound of flails, that should be beating now;
Nor man nor beast astir.  What can this mean?

Knocks at the door.

What ho!  Giles Corey!  Hillo-ho!  Giles Corey!--
No answer but the echo from the barn,
And the ill-omened cawing of the crow,
That yonder wings his flight across the fields,
As if he scented carrion in the air.

Enter TITUBA with a basket.

What woman's this, that, like an apparition,
Haunts this deserted homestead in broad day?
Woman, who are you?

TITUBA.
                    I'm Tituba.
I am John Indian's wife.  I am a Witch.

GARDNER.
What are you doing here?

TITUBA.
              I am gathering herbs,--
Cinquefoil, and saxifrage, and pennyroyal.

GARDNER (looking at the herbs).
This is not cinquefoil, it is deadly nightshade!
This is not saxifrage, but hellebore!
This is not pennyroyal, it is henbane!
Do you come here to poison these good people?

TITUBA.
I get these for the Doctor in the Village.
Beware of Tituba.  I pinch the children;
Make little poppets and stick pins in them,
And then the children cry out they are pricked.
The Black Dog came to me and said, "Serve me!"
I was afraid.  He made me hurt the children.

GARDNER.
Poor soul!  She's crazed, with all these Devil's doings.

TITUBA.
Will you, sir, sign the book?

GARDNER.
                      No, I'll not sign it.
Where is Giles Corey?  Do you know Giles Corey!

TITUBA.
He's safe enough.  He's down there in the prison.

GARDNER.
Corey in prison?  What is he accused of?

TITURA.
Giles Corey and Martha Corey are in prison
Down there in Salem Village.  Both are witches.
She came to me and whispered, "Kill the children!"
Both signed the Book!

GARDNER.

         Begone, you imp of darkness!
You Devil's dam!

TITUBA.
                 Beware of Tituba!
                            [Exit.

GARDNER.
How often out at sea on stormy nights,
When the waves thundered round me, and the wind
Bellowed, and beat the canvas, and my ship
Clove through the solid darkness, like a wedge,
I've thought of him upon his pleasant farm,
Living in quiet with his thrifty housewife,
And envied him, and wished his fate were mine!
And now I find him shipwrecked utterly,
Drifting upon this sea of sorceries,
And lost, perhaps, beyond all aid of man!
                                  [Exit.


SCENE II.. -- The prison.  GILES COREY at a table on which are
some papers.

COREY.
Now I have done with earth and all its cares;
I give my worldly goods to my dear children;
My body I bequeath to my tormentors,
And my immortal soul to Him who made it.
O God! who in thy wisdom dost afflict me
With an affliction greater than most men
Have ever yet endured or shall endure,
Suffer me not in this last bitter hour
For any pains of death to fall from Thee!

MARTHA is heard singing.
     Arise, O righteous Lord!
       And disappoint my foes;
     They are but thine avenging sword,
       Whose wounds are swift to close.

COREY.
Hark, hark! it is her voice!  She is not dead!
She lives!  I am not utterly forsaken!

MARTHA, singing.
     By thine abounding grace,
       And mercies multiplied,
     I shall awake, and see thy face;
       I shall be satisfied.

COREY hides his face in his hands.  Enter the JAILER, followed by
RICHARD GARDNER.

JAILER.
Here's a seafaring man, one Richard Gardner,
A friend of yours, who asks to speak with you.

COREY rises.  They embrace.

COREY.
I'm glad to see you, ay, right glad to see you.

GARDNER.
And I am most sorely grieved to see you thus.

COREY.
Of all the friends I had in happier days,
You are the first, ay, and the only one,
That comes to seek me out in my disgrace!
And you but come in time to say farewell,
They've dug my grave already in the field.
I thank you.  There is something in your presence,
I know not what it is, that gives me strength.
Perhaps it is the bearing of a man
Familiar with all dangers of the deep,
Familiar with the cries of drowning men,
With fire, and wreck, and foundering ships at sea!

GARDNER.
Ah, I have never known a wreck like yours!
Would I could save you!

COREY.
                    Do not speak of that.
It is too late.  I am resolved to die.

GARDNER.
Why would you die who have so much to live for?--
Your daughters, and--

COREY.
            You cannot say the word.
My daughters have gone from me.  They are married;
They have their homes, their thoughts, apart from me;
I will not say their hearts,--that were too cruel.
What would you have me do?

GARDNER.
                    Confess and live.
COREY.
That's what they said who came here yesterday
To lay a heavy weight upon my conscience
By telling me that I was driven forth
As an unworthy member of their church.

GARDNER.
It is an awful death.

COREY.
                     'T is but to drown,
And have the weight of all the seas upon you.

GARDNER.
Say something; say enough to fend off death
Till this tornado of fanaticism
Blows itself out.  Let me come in between you
And your severer self, with my plain sense;
Do not be obstinate.

COREY.
                     I will not plead.
If I deny, I am condemned already,
In courts where ghosts appear as witnesses,
And swear men's lives away.  If I confess,
Then I confess a lie, to buy a life
Which is not life, but only death in life.
I will not bear false witness against any,
Not even against myself, whom I count least.

GARDNER (aside).
Ah, what a noble character is this!

COREY.
I pray you, do not urge me to do that
You would not do yourself.  I have already
The bitter taste of death upon my lips;
I feel the pressure of the heavy weight
That will crush out my life within this hour;
But if a word could save me, and that word
Were not the Truth; nay, if it did but swerve
A hair's-breadth from the Truth, I would not say it!

GARDNER (aside).
How mean I seem beside a man like this!

COREY.
As for my wife, my Martha and my Martyr,--
Whose virtues, like the stars, unseen by day,
Though numberless, do but await the dark
To manifest themselves unto all eyes,--
She who first won me from my evil ways,
And taught me how to live by her example,
By her example teaches me to die,
And leads me onward to the better life!

SHERIFF (without).
Giles Corey!  Come!  The hour has struck!

COREY.
                          I come!
Here is my body; ye may torture it,
But the immortal soul ye cannot crush!
                              [Exeunt.


SCENE III-- A street in the Village.  Enter GLOYD and others.

GLOYD.
Quick, or we shall be late!

A MAN.
                 That's not the way.
Come here; come up this lane.

GLOYD.
                        I wonder now
If the old man will die, and will not speak?
He's obstinate enough and tough enough
For anything on earth.

A bell tolls.

                Hark!  What is that?

A MAN.
The passing bell.  He's dead!

GLOYD.
                       We are too late.
                      [Exeunt in haste.


SCENE IV. -- A field near the graveyard, GILES COREY lying dead,
with a great stone on his breast.  The Sheriff at his head,
RICHARD GARDNER at his feet.  A crowd behind.  The bell tolling.
Enter HATHORNE and MATHER.

HATHORNE.
This is the Potter's Field.  Behold the fate
Of those who deal in Witchcrafts, and, when questioned,
Refuse to plead their guilt or innocence,
And stubbornly drag death upon themselves.

MATHER.
O sight most horrible!  In a land like this,
Spangled with Churches Evangelical,
Inwrapped in our salvations, must we seek
In mouldering statute-books of English Courts
Some old forgotten Law, to do such deeds?
Those who lie buried in the Potter's Field
Will rise again, as surely as ourselves
That sleep in honored graves with epitaphs;
And this poor man, whom we have made a victim,
Hereafter will be counted as a martyr!



FINALE

SAINT JOHN

SAINT JOHN wandering over the face of the Earth.

SAINT JOHN.
The Ages come and go,
The Centuries pass as Years;
My hair is white as the snow,
My feet are weary and slow,
The earth is wet with my tears
The kingdoms crumble, and fall
Apart, like a ruined wall,
Or a bank that is undermined
By a river's ceaseless flow,
And leave no trace behind!
The world itself is old;
The portals of Time unfold
On hinges of iron, that grate
And groan with the rust and the weight,
Like the hinges of a gate
That hath fallen to decay;
But the evil doth not cease;
There is war instead of peace,
Instead of Love there is hate;
And still I must wander and wait,
Still I must watch and pray,
Not forgetting in whose sight,
A thousand years in their flight
Are as a single day.

The life of man is a gleam
Of light, that comes and goes
Like the course of the Holy Stream.
The cityless river, that flows
From fountains no one knows,
Through the Lake of Galilee,
Through forests and level lands,
Over rocks, and shallows, and sands
Of a wilderness wild and vast,
Till it findeth its rest at last
In the desolate Dead Sea!
But alas! alas for me
Not yet this rest shall be!

What, then! doth Charity fail?
Is Faith of no avail?
Is Hope blown out like a light
By a gust of wind in the night?
The clashing of creeds, and the strife
Of the many beliefs, that in vain
Perplex man's heart and brain,
Are naught but the rustle of leaves,
When the breath of God upheaves
The boughs of the Tree of Life,
And they subside again!
And I remember still
The words, and from whom they came,
Not he that repeateth the name,
But he that doeth the will!

And Him evermore I behold
Walking in Galilee,
Through the cornfield's waving gold,
In hamlet, in wood, and in wold,
By the shores of the Beautiful Sea.
He toucheth the sightless eyes;
Before Him the demons flee;
To the dead He sayeth: Arise!
To the living: Follow me!
And that voice still soundeth on
From the centuries that are gone,
To the centuries that shall be!
From all vain pomps and shows,
From the pride that overflows,
And the false conceits of men;
From all the narrow rules
And subtleties of Schools,
And the craft of tongue and pen;
Bewildered in its search,
Bewildered with the cry,
Lo, here! lo, there, the Church!
Poor, sad Humanity
Through all the dust and heat
Turns back with bleeding feet,
By the weary road it came,
Unto the simple thought
By the great Master taught,
And that remaineth still:
Not he that repeateth the name,
But he that doeth the will!



********


JUDAS MACCABAEUS.


ACT I.

The Citadel of Antiochus at Jerusalem.

SCENE I. -- ANTIOCHUS; JASON.

ANTIOCHUS.
O Antioch, my Antioch, my city!
Queen of the East! my solace, my delight!
The dowry of my sister Cleopatra
When she was wed to Ptolemy, and now
Won back and made more wonderful by me!
I love thee, and I long to be once more
Among the players and the dancing women
Within thy gates, and bathe in the Orontes,
Thy river and mine.  O Jason, my High-Priest,
For I have made thee so, and thou art mine,
Hast thou seen Antioch the Beautiful?

JASON.
Never, my Lord.

ANTIOCHUS.
Then hast thou never seen
The wonder of the world.  This city of David
Compared with Antioch is but a village,
And its inhabitants compared with Greeks
Are mannerless boors.

JASON.
They are barbarians,
And mannerless.

ANTIOCHUS.
They must be civilized.
They must be made to have more gods than one;
And goddesses besides.

JASON.
They shall have more.

ANTIOCHUS.
They must have hippodromes, and games, and baths,
Stage-plays and festivals, and most of all
The Dionysia.

JASON.
They shall have them all.

ANTIOCHUS.
By Heracles! but I should like to see
These Hebrews crowned with ivy, and arrayed
In skins of fawns, with drums and flutes and thyrsi,
Revel and riot through the solemn streets
Of their old town.   Ha, ha!  It makes me merry
Only to think of it!--Thou dost not laugh.

JASON.
Yea, I laugh inwardly.

ANTIOCHUS.
The new Greek leaven
Works slowly in this Israelitish dough!
Have I not sacked the Temple, and on the altar
Set up the statue of Olympian Zeus
To Hellenize it?

JASON.
Thou hast done all this.

ANTIOCHUS.
As thou wast Joshua once and now art Jason,
And from a Hebrew hast become a Greek,
So shall this Hebrew nation be translated,
Their very natures and their names be changed,
And all be Hellenized.

JASON.
It shall be done.

ANTIOCHUS.
Their manners and their laws and way of living
Shall all be Greek.  They shall unlearn their language,
And learn the lovely speech of Antioch.
Where hast thou been to-day?  Thou comest late.

JASON.
Playing at discus with the other priests
In the Gymnasium.

ANTIOCHUS.
Thou hast done well.
There's nothing better for you lazy priests
Than discus-playing with the common people.
Now tell me, Jason, what these Hebrews call me
When they converse together at their games.

JASON.
Antiochus Epiphanes, my Lord;
Antiochus the Illustrious.

ANTIOCHUS.
O, not that;
That is the public cry; I mean the name
They give me when they talk among themselves,
And think that no one listens; what is that?

JASON.
Antiochus Epimanes, my Lord!

ANTIOCHUS.
Antiochus the Mad!  Ay, that is it.
And who hath said it?  Who hath set in motion
That sorry jest?

JASON.
The Seven Sons insane
Of a weird woman, like themselves insane.

ANTIOCHUS.
I like their courage, but it shall not save them.
They shall be made to eat the flesh of swine,
Or they shall die.  Where are they?

JASON.
In the dungeons
Beneath this tower.

ANTIOCHUS.
There let them stay and starve,
Till I am ready to make Greeks of them,
After my fashion.

JASON.
They shall stay and starve.--
My Lord, the Ambassadors of Samaria
Await thy pleasure.

ANTIOCHUS.
Why not my displeasure?
Ambassadors are tedious.  They are men
Who work for their own ends, and not for mine
There is no furtherance in them.  Let them go
To Apollonius, my governor
There in Samaria, and not trouble me.
What do they want?

JASON.
Only the royal sanction
To give a name unto a nameless temple
Upon Mount Gerizim.

ANTIOCHUS.
Then bid them enter.
This pleases me, and furthers my designs.
The occasion is auspicious.  Bid them enter.



SCENE II. -- ANTIOCHUS; JASON; THE SAMARITAN AMBASSADORS.

ANTIOCHUS.
Approach.  Come forward; stand not at the door
Wagging your long beards, but demean yourselves
As doth become Ambassadors.  What seek ye?

AN AMBASSADOR.
An audience from the King.

ANTIOCHUS.
Speak, and be brief.
Waste not the time in useless rhetoric.
Words are not things.

AMBASSADOR (reading).  "To King Antiochus,
The God, Epiphanes; a Memorial
From the Sidonians, who live at Sichem."

ANTIOCHUS.
Sidonians?

AMBASSADOR.
Ay, my Lord.

ANTIOCHUS.
Go on, go on!
And do not tire thyself and me with bowing!

AMBASSADOR (reading).
"We are a colony of Medes and Persians."

ANTIOCHUS.
No, ye are Jews from one of the Ten Tribes;
Whether Sidonians or Samaritans
Or Jews of Jewry, matters not to me;
Ye are all Israelites, ye are all Jews.
When the Jews prosper, ye claim kindred with them;
When the Jews suffer, ye are Medes and Persians:
I know that in the days of Alexander
Ye claimed exemption from the annual tribute
In the Sabbatic Year, because, ye said,
Your fields had not been planted in that year.

AMBASSADOR (reading).
"Our fathers, upon certain frequent plagues,
And following an ancient superstition,
Were long accustomed to observe that day
Which by the Israelites is called the Sabbath,
And in a temple on Mount Gerizim
Without a name, they offered sacrifice.
Now we, who are Sidonians, beseech thee,
Who art our benefactor and our savior,
Not to confound us with these wicked Jews,
But to give royal order and injunction
To Apollonius in Samaria.
Thy governor, and likewise to Nicanor,
Thy procurator, no more to molest us;
And let our nameless temple now be named
The Temple of Jupiter Hellenius."

ANTIOCHUS.
This shall be done.  Full well it pleaseth me
Ye are not Jews, or are no longer Jews,
But Greeks; if not by birth, yet Greeks by custom.
Your nameless temple shall receive the name
Of Jupiter Hellenius.  Ye may go!


SCENE III. -- ANTIOCHUS; JASON.

ANTIOCHUS.
My task is easier than I dreamed.  These people
Meet me half-way.  Jason, didst thou take note
How these Samaritans of Sichem said
They were not Jews? that they were Medes and Persians,
They were Sidonians, anything but Jews?
'T is of good augury. The rest will follow
Till the whole land is Hellenized.

JASON.
My Lord,
These are Samaritans.  The tribe of Judah
Is of a different temper, and the task
Will be more difficult.

ANTIOCHUS.
Dost thou gainsay me?

JASON.
I know the stubborn nature of the Jew.
Yesterday, Eleazer, an old man,
Being fourscore years and ten, chose rather death
By torture than to eat the flesh of swine.

ANTIOCHUS.
The life is in the blood, and the whole nation
Shall bleed to death, or it shall change its faith!

JASON.
Hundreds have fled already to the mountains
Of Ephraim, where Judas Maccabaeus
Hath raised the standard of revolt against thee.

ANTIOCHUS.
I will burn down their city, and will make it
Waste as a wilderness.  Its thoroughfares
Shall be but furrows in a field of ashes.
It shall be sown with salt as Sodom is!
This hundred and fifty-third Olympiad
Shall have a broad and blood-red sea upon it,
Stamped with the awful letters of my name,
Antiochus the God, Epiphanes!--
Where are those Seven Sons?

JASON.
My Lord, they wait
Thy royal pleasure.

ANTIOCHUS.
They shall wait no longer!


ACT II.

The Dungeons in the Citadel.

SCENE I. -- THE MOTHER of the SEVEN SONS alone, listening.


THE MOTHER.
Be strong, my heart!
Break not till they are dead,
All, all my Seven Sons; then burst asunder,
And let this tortured and tormented soul
Leap and rush out like water through the shards
Of earthen vessels broken at a well.
O my dear children, mine in life and death,
I know not how ye came into my womb;
I neither gave you breath, nor gave you life,
And neither was it I that formed the members
Of every one of you.  But the Creator,
Who made the world, and made the heavens above us,
Who formed the generation of mankind,
And found out the beginning of all things,
He gave you breath and life, and will again
Of his own mercy, as ye now regard
Not your own selves, but his eternal law.
I do not murmur, nay, I thank thee, God,
That I and mine have not been deemed unworthy
To suffer for thy sake, and for thy law,
And for the many sins of Israel.
Hark! I can hear within the sound of scourges!
I feel them more than ye do, O my sons!
But cannot come to you.  I, who was wont
To wake at night at the least cry ye made,
To whom ye ran at every slightest hurt,
I cannot take you now into my lap
And soothe your pain, but God will take you all
Into his pitying arms, and comfort you,
And give you rest.

A VOICE (within).
What wouldst thou ask of us?
Ready are we to die, but we will never
Transgress the law and customs of our fathers.

THE MOTHER.
It is the Voice of my first-born!  O brave
And noble boy!  Thou hast the privilege
Of dying first, as thou wast born the first.

THE SAME VOICE (within).
God looketh on us, and hath comfort in us;
As Moses in his song of old declared,
He in his servants shall be comforted.

THE MOTHER.
I knew thou wouldst not fail!--He speaks no more,
He is beyond all pain!

ANTIOCHUS. (within).
If thou eat not
Thou shalt be tortured throughout all the members
Of thy whole body.  Wilt thou eat then?

SECOND VOICE. (within).
No.

THE MOTHER.
It is Adaiah's voice.  I tremble for him.
I know his nature, devious as the wind,
And swift to change, gentle and yielding always.
Be steadfast, O my son!

THE SAME VOICE (within).
Thou, like a fury,
Takest us from this present life, but God,
Who rules the world, shall raise us up again
Into life everlasting.

THE MOTHER.
God, I thank thee
That thou hast breathed into that timid heart
Courage to die for thee.  O my Adaiah,
Witness of God! if thou for whom I feared
Canst thus encounter death, I need not fear;
The others will not shrink.

THIRD VOICE (within).
Behold these hands
Held out to thee, O King Antiochus,
Not to implore thy mercy, but to show
That I despise them.  He who gave them to me
Will give them back again.

THE MOTHER.
O Avilan,
It is thy voice.  For the last time I hear it;
For the last time on earth, but not the last.
To death it bids defiance and to torture.
It sounds to me as from another world,
And makes the petty miseries of this
Seem unto me as naught, and less than naught.
Farewell, my Avilan; nay, I should say
Welcome, my Avilan; for I am dead
Before thee.  I am waiting for the others.
Why do they linger?

FOURTH VOICE (within).
It is good, O King,
Being put to death by men, to look for hope
From God, to be raised up again by him.
But thou--no resurrection shalt thou have
To life hereafter.

THE MOTHER.
Four! already four!
Three are still living; nay, they all are living,
Half here, half there.  Make haste, Antiochus,
To reunite us; for the sword that cleaves
These miserable bodies makes a door
Through which our souls, impatient of release,
Rush to each other's arms.

FIFTH VOICE (within).
Thou hast the power;
Thou doest what thou wilt.  Abide awhile,
And thou shalt see the power of God, and how
He will torment thee and thy seed.

THE MOTHER.
O hasten;
Why dost thou pause?  Thou who hast slain already
So many Hebrew women, and hast hung
Their murdered infants round their necks, slay me,
For I too am a woman, and these boys
Are mine.  Make haste to slay us all,
And hang my lifeless babes about my neck.

SIXTH VOICE (within).
Think not,
Antiochus, that takest in hand
To strive against the God of Israel,
Thou shalt escape unpunished, for his wrath
Shall overtake thee and thy bloody house.

THE MOTHER.
One more, my Sirion, and then all is ended.
Having put all to bed, then in my turn
I will lie down and sleep as sound as they.
My Sirion, my youngest, best beloved!
And those bright golden locks, that I so oft
Have curled about these fingers, even now
Are foul with blood and dust, like a lamb's fleece,
Slain in the shambles.--Not a sound I hear.
This silence is more terrible to me
Than any sound, than any cry of pain,
That might escape the lips of one who dies.
Doth his heart fail him?  Doth he fall away
In the last hour from God?  O Sirion, Sirion,
Art thou afraid?  I do not hear thy voice.
Die as thy brothers died.  Thou must not live!


SCENE II. -- THE MOTHER; ANTIOCHUS; SIRION,

THE MOTHER.
Are they all dead?

ANTIOCHUS.
Of all thy Seven Sons
One only lives.  Behold them where they lie
How dost thou like this picture?

THE MOTHER.
God in heaven!
Can a man do such deeds, and yet not die
By the recoil of his own wickedness?
Ye murdered, bleeding, mutilated bodies
That were my children once, and still are mine,
I cannot watch o'er you as Rispah watched
In sackcloth o'er the seven sons of Saul,
Till water drop upon you out of heaven
And wash this blood away!  I cannot mourn
As she, the daughter of Aiah, mourned the dead,
From the beginning of the barley-harvest
Until the autumn rains, and suffered not
The birds of air to rest on them by day,
Nor the wild beasts by night.  For ye have died
A better death, a death so full of life
That I ought rather to rejoice than mourn.--
Wherefore art thou not dead, O Sirion?
Wherefore art thou the only living thing
Among thy brothers dead?  Art thou afraid?

ANTIOCHUS.
O woman, I have spared him for thy sake,
For he is fair to look upon and comely;
And I have sworn to him by all the gods
That I would crown his life with joy and honor,
Heap treasures on him, luxuries, delights,
Make him my friend and keeper of my secrets,
If he would turn from your Mosaic Law
And be as we are; but he will not listen.

THE MOTHER.
My noble Sirion!

ANTIOCHUS.
Therefore I beseech thee,
Who art his mother, thou wouldst speak with him,
And wouldst persuade him.  I am sick of blood.

THE MOTHER.
Yea, I will speak with him and will persuade him.
O Sirion, my son! have pity on me,
On me that bare thee, and that gave thee suck,
And fed and nourished thee, and brought thee up
With the dear trouble of a mother's care
Unto this age.  Look on the heavens above thee,
And on the earth and all that is therein;
Consider that God made them out of things
That were not; and that likewise in this manner
Mankind was made.  Then fear not this tormentor
But, being worthy of thy brethren, take
Thy death as they did, that I may receive thee
Again in mercy with them.

ANTIOCHUS.
I am mocked,
Yea, I am laughed to scorn.

SIRION.
Whom wait ye for?
Never will I obey the King's commandment,
But the commandment of the ancient Law,
That was by Moses given unto our fathers.
And thou, O godless man, that of all others
Art the most wicked, be not lifted up,
Nor puffed up with uncertain hopes, uplifting
Thy hand against the servants of the Lord,
For thou hast not escaped the righteous judgment
Of the Almighty God, who seeth all things!

ANTIOCHUS.
He is no God of mine; I fear him not.

SIRION.
My brothers, who have suffered a brief pain,
Are dead; but thou, Antiochus, shalt suffer
The punishment of pride.  I offer up
My body and my life, beseeching God
That he would speedily be merciful
Unto our nation, and that thou by plagues
Mysterious and by torments mayest confess
That he alone is God.

ANTIOCHUS.
Ye both shall perish
By torments worse than any that your God,
Here or hereafter, hath in store for me.

THE MOTHER.
My Sirion, I am proud of thee!

ANTIOCHUS.
Be silent!
Go to thy bed of torture in yon chamber,
Where lie so many sleepers, heartless mother!
Thy footsteps will not wake them, nor thy voice,
Nor wilt thou hear, amid thy troubled dreams,
Thy children crying for thee in the night!

THE MOTHER.
O Death, that stretchest thy white hands to me,
I fear them not, but press them to my lips,
That are as white as thine; for I am Death,
Nay, am the Mother of Death, seeing these sons
All lying lifeless.--Kiss me, Sirion.



ACT III.

The Battle-field of Beth-horon.

SCENE I. -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS in armor before his tent.

JUDAS.
The trumpets sound; the echoes of the mountains
Answer them, as the Sabbath morning breaks
Over Beth-horon and its battle-field,
Where the great captain of the hosts of God,
A slave brought up in the brick-fields of Egypt,
O'ercame the Amorites.  There was no day
Like that, before or after it, nor shall be.
The sun stood still; the hammers of the hail
Beat on their harness; and the captains set
Their weary feet upon the necks of kings,
As I will upon thine, Antiochus,
Thou man of blood!--Behold the rising sun
Strikes on the golden letters of my banner,
Be Elohim Yehovah!  Who is like
To thee, O Lord, among the gods!--Alas!
I am not Joshua, I cannot say,
"Sun, stand thou still on Gibeon, and thou Moon,
In Ajalon!"  Nor am I one who wastes
The fateful time in useless lamentation;
But one who bears his life upon his hand
To lose it or to save it, as may best
Serve the designs of Him who giveth life.



SCENE II -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS; JEWISH FUGITIVES.

JUDAS.
Who and what are ye, that with furtive steps
Steal in among our tents?

FUGITIVES.
O Maccabaeus,
Outcasts are we, and fugitives as thou art,
Jews of Jerusalem, that have escaped
From the polluted city, and from death.

JUDAS.
None can escape from death.  Say that ye come
To die for Israel, and ye are welcome.
What tidings bring ye?

FUGITIVES.
Tidings of despair.
The Temple is laid waste; the precious vessels,
Censers of gold, vials and veils and crowns,
And golden ornaments, and hidden treasures,
Have all been taken from it, and the Gentiles
With revelling and with riot fill its courts,
And dally with harlots in the holy places.

JUDAS.
All this I knew before.

FUGITIVES.
Upon the altar
Are things profane, things by the law forbidden;
Nor can we keep our Sabbaths or our Feasts,
But on the festivals of Dionysus
Must walk in their processions, bearing ivy
To crown a drunken god.

JUDAS.
This too I know.
But tell me of the Jews.  How fare the Jews?

FUGITIVES.
The coming of this mischief hath been sore
And grievous to the people.  All the land
Is full of lamentation and of mourning.
The Princes and the Elders weep and wail;
The young men and the maidens are made feeble;
The beauty of the women hath been changed.

JUDAS.
And are there none to die for Israel?
'T is not enough to mourn.  Breastplate and harness
Are better things than sackcloth.  Let the women
Lament for Israel; the men should die.

FUGITIVES.
Both men and women die; old men and young:
Old Eleazer died: and Mahala
With all her Seven Sons.

JUDAS.
Antiochus,
At every step thou takest there is left
A bloody footprint in the street, by which
The avenging wrath of God will track thee out!
It is enough.  Go to the sutler's tents;
Those of you who are men, put on such armor
As ye may find; those of you who are women,
Buckle that armor on; and for a watchword
Whisper, or cry aloud, "The Help of God."


SCENE III. -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS; NICANOR.

NICANOR.
Hail, Judas Maccabaeus!

JUDAS.
Hail!--Who art thou
That comest here in this mysterious guise
Into our camp unheralded?

NICANOR.
A herald
Sent from Nicanor.

JUDAS.
Heralds come not thus.
Armed with thy shirt of mail from head to heel,
Thou glidest like a serpent silently
Into my presence.  Wherefore dost thou turn
Thy face from me?  A herald speaks his errand
With forehead unabashed.  Thou art a spy sent by Nicanor.

NICANOR.
No disguise avails!
Behold my face; I am Nicanor's self.

JUDAS.
Thou art indeed Nicanor.  I salute thee.
What brings thee hither to this hostile camp
Thus unattended?

NICANOR.
Confidence in thee.
Thou hast the nobler virtues of thy race,
Without the failings that attend those virtues.
Thou canst be strong, and yet not tyrannous,
Canst righteous be and not intolerant.
Let there be peace between us.

JUDAS.
What is peace?
Is it to bow in silence to our victors?
Is it to see our cities sacked and pillaged,
Our people slain, or sold as slaves, or fleeing
At night-time by the blaze of burning towns;
Jerusalem laid waste; the Holy Temple
Polluted with strange gods?  Are these things peace?

NICANOR.
These are the dire necessities that wait
On war, whose loud and bloody enginery
I seek to stay.  Let there be peace between
Antiochus and thee.

JUDAS.
Antiochus?
What is Antiochus, that he should prate
Of peace to me, who am a fugitive?
To-day he shall be lifted up; to-morrow
Shall not be found, because he is returned
Unto his dust; his thought has come to nothing.
There is no peace between us, nor can be,
Until this banner floats upon the walls
Of our Jerusalem.

NICANOR.
Between that city
And thee there lies a waving wall of tents,
Held by a host of forty thousand foot,
And horsemen seven thousand.  What hast thou
To bring against all these?

JUDAS.
The power of God,
Whose breath shall scatter your white tents abroad,
As flakes of snow.

NICANOR.
Your Mighty One in heaven
Will not do battle on the Seventh Day;
It is his day of rest.

JUDAS.
Silence, blasphemer.
Go to thy tents.

NICANOR.
Shall it be war or peace?

JUDAS.
War, war, and only war.  Go to thy tents
That shall be scattered, as by you were scattered
The torn and trampled pages of the Law,
Blown through the windy streets.

NICANOR.
Farewell, brave foe!

JUDAS.
Ho, there, my captains!  Have safe-conduct given
Unto Nicanor's herald through the camp,
And come yourselves to me.--Farewell, Nicanor!



SCENE IV. -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS; CAPTAINS AND SOLDIERS.

JUDAS.
The hour is come.  Gather the host together
For battle.  Lo, with trumpets and with songs
The army of Nicanor comes against us.
Go forth to meet them, praying in your hearts,
And fighting with your hands.

CAPTAINS.
Look forth and see!
The morning sun is shining on their shields
Of gold and brass; the mountains glisten with them,
And shine like lamps.  And we who are so few
And poorly armed, and ready to faint with fasting,
How shall we fight against this multitude?

JUDAS.
The victory of a battle standeth not
In multitudes, but in the strength that cometh
From heaven above.  The Lord forbid that I
Should do this thing, and flee away from them.
Nay, if our hour be come, then let us die;
Let us not stain our honor.

CAPTAINS.
'T is the Sabbath.
Wilt thou fight on the Sabbath, Maccabaeus?

JUDAS.
Ay; when I fight the battles of the Lord,
I fight them on his day, as on all others.
Have ye forgotten certain fugitives
That fled once to these hills, and hid themselves
In caves?  How their pursuers camped against them
Upon the Seventh Day, and challenged them?
And how they answered not, nor cast a stone,
Nor stopped the places where they lay concealed,
But meekly perished with their wives and children,
Even to the number of a thousand souls?
We who are fighting for our laws and lives
Will not so perish.

CAPTAINS.
Lead us to the battle!

JUDAS.
And let our watchword be, "The Help of God!"
Last night I dreamed a dream; and in my vision
Beheld Onias, our High-Priest of old,
Who holding up his hands prayed for the Jews.
This done, in the like manner there appeared
An old man, and exceeding glorious,
With hoary hair, and of a wonderful
And excellent majesty.  And Onias said:
"This is a lover of the Jews, who prayeth
Much for the people and the Holy City,--
God's prophet Jeremias."  And the prophet
Held forth his right hand and gave unto me
A sword of gold; and giving it he said:
"Take thou this holy sword, a gift from God,
And with it thou shalt wound thine adversaries."

CAPTAINS.
The Lord is with us!

JUDAS.
Hark! I hear the trumpets
Sound from Beth-horon; from the battle-field
Of Joshua, where he smote the Amorites,
Smote the Five Kings of Eglon and of Jarmuth,
Of Hebron, Lachish, and Jerusalem,
As we to-day will smite Nicanor's hosts
And leave a memory of great deeds behind us.

CAPTAINS and SOLDIERS.
The Help of God!

JUDAS.
Be Elohim Yehovah!
Lord, thou didst send thine Angel in the time
Of Esekias, King of Israel,
And in the armies of Sennacherib
Didst slay a hundred fourscore and five thousand.
Wherefore, O Lord of heaven, now also send
Before us a good angel for a fear,
And through the might of thy right arm let those
Be stricken with terror that have come this day
Against thy holy people to blaspheme!



ACT IV.

The outer Courts of the Temple at Jerusalem.

SCENE I. -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS; CAPTAINS; JEWS.

JUDAS.
Behold, our enemies are discomfited.
Jerusalem is fallen; and our banners
Float from her battlements, and o'er her gates
Nicanor's severed head, a sign of terror,
Blackens in wind and sun.

CAPTAINS.
O Maccabaeus,
The citadel of Antiochus, wherein
The Mother with her Seven Sons was murdered,
Is still defiant.

JUDAS.
Wait.

CAPTAINS.
Its hateful aspect
Insults us with the bitter memories
Of other days.

JUDAS.
Wait; it shall disappear
And vanish as a cloud.  First let us cleanse
The Sanctuary.  See, it is become
Waste like a wilderness.  Its golden gates
Wrenched from their hinges and consumed by fire;
Shrubs growing in its courts as in a forest;
Upon its altars hideous and strange idols;
And strewn about its pavement at my feet
Its Sacred Books, half burned and painted o'er
With images of heathen gods.

JEWS.
Woe! woe!
Our beauty and our glory are laid waste!
The Gentiles have profaned our holy places!

(Lamentation and alarm of trumpets.)

JUDAS.
This sound of trumpets, and this lamentation,
The heart-cry of a people toward the heavens,
Stir me to wrath and vengeance.  Go, my captains;
I hold you back no longer.  Batter down
The citadel of Antiochus, while here
We sweep away his altars and his gods.


SCENE II. -- JUDAS MACCABAEUS; JASON; JEWS,


JEWS.
Lurking among the ruins of the Temple,
Deep in its inner courts, we found this man,
Clad as High-Priest.

JUDAS.
I ask not who thou art.
I know thy face, writ over with deceit
As are these tattered volumes of the Law
With heathen images.  A priest of God
Wast thou in other days, but thou art now
A priest of Satan.  Traitor, thou art Jason.

JASON.
I am thy prisoner, Judas Maccabaeus,
And it would ill become me to conceal
My name or office.

JUDAS.
Over yonder gate
There hangs the head of one who was a Greek.
What should prevent me now, thou man of sin,
From hanging at its side the head of one
Who born a Jew hath made himself a Greek?

JASON.
Justice prevents thee.

JUDAS.
Justice?  Thou art stained
With every crime against which the Decalogue
Thunders with all its thunder.

JASON.
If not Justice,
Then Mercy, her handmaiden.

JUDAS.
When hast thou
At any time, to any man or woman,
Or even to any little child, shown mercy?

JASON.
I have but done what King Antiochus
Commanded me.

JUDAS.
True, thou hast been the weapon
With which he struck; but hast been such a weapon,
So flexible, so fitted to his hand,
It tempted him to strike.  So thou hast urged him
To double wickedness, thine own and his.
Where is this King?  Is he in Antioch
Among his women still, and from his windows
Throwing down gold by handfuls, for the rabble
To scramble for?

JASON.
Nay, he is gone from there,
Gone with an army into the far East.

JUDAS.
And wherefore gone?

JASON.
I know not. For the space
Of forty days almost were horsemen seen
Running in air, in cloth of gold, and armed
With lances, like a band of soldiery;
It was a sign of triumph.

JUDAS.
Or of death.
Wherefore art thou not with him?

JASON.
I was left
For service in the Temple.

JUDAS.
To pollute it,
And to corrupt the Jews; for there are men
Whose presence is corruption; to be with them
Degrades us and deforms the things we do.

JASON.
I never made a boast, as some men do,
Of my superior virtue, nor denied
The weakness of my nature, that hath made me
Subservient to the will of other men.

JUDAS.
Upon this day, the five and twentieth day
Of the month Caslan, was the Temple here
Profaned by strangers,--by Antiochus
And thee, his instrument.  Upon this day
Shall it be cleansed.  Thou, who didst lend thyself
Unto this profanation, canst not be
A witness of these solemn services.
There can be nothing clean where thou art present.
The people put to death Callisthenes,
Who burned the Temple gates; and if they find thee
Will surely slay thee.  I will spare thy life
To punish thee the longer.  Thou shalt wander
Among strange nations.  Thou, that hast cast out
So many from their native land, shalt perish
In a strange land.  Thou, that hast left so many
Unburied, shalt have none to mourn for thee,
Nor any solemn funerals at all,
Nor sepulchre with thy fathers.--Get thee hence!

(Music.  Procession of Priests and people,
with citherns, harps, and cymbals.  JUDAS
MACCABAEUS puts himself at their
head, and they go into the inner courts.)


SCENE III. -- JASON, alone.

JASON.
Through the Gate Beautiful I see them come
With branches and green boughs and leaves of palm,
And pass into the inner courts. Alas!
I should be with them, should be one of them,
But in an evil hour, an hour of weakness,
That cometh unto all, I fell away
From the old faith, and did not clutch the new,
Only an outward semblance of belief;
For the new faith I cannot make mine own,
Not being born to it.  It hath no root
Within me.  I am neither Jew nor Greek,
But stand between them both, a renegade
To each in turn; having no longer faith
In gods or men.  Then what mysterious charm,
What fascination is it chains my feet,
And keeps me gazing like a curious child
Into the holy places, where the priests
Have raised their altar?--Striking stones together,
They take fire out of them, and light the lamps
In the great candlestick.  They spread the veils,
And set the loaves of showbread on the table.
The incense burns; the well-remembered odor
Comes wafted unto me, and takes me back
To other days.  I see myself among them
As I was then; and the old superstition
Creeps over me again!--A childish fancy!--
And hark! they sing with citherns and with cymbals,
And all the people fall upon their faces,
Praying and worshipping!--I will away
Into the East, to meet Antiochus
Upon his homeward journey, crowned with triumph.
Alas! to-day I would give everything
To see a friend's face, or to hear a voice
That had the slightest tone of comfort in it!



ACT V.

The Mountains of Ecbatana.

SCENE I. -- ANTIOCHUS; PHILIP; ATTENDANTS.

ANTIOCHUS.
Here let us rest awhile.  Where are we, Philip?
What place is this?

PHILIP.
Ecbatana, my Lord;
And yonder mountain range is the Orontes.

ANTIOCHUS.
The Orontes is my river at Antioch.
Why did I leave it?  Why have I been tempted
By coverings of gold and shields and breastplates
To plunder Elymais, and be driven
From out its gates, as by a fiery blast
Out of a furnace?

PHILIP.
These are fortune's changes.

ANTIOCHUS.
What a defeat it was!  The Persian horsemen
Came like a mighty wind, the wind Khamaseen,
And melted us away, and scattered us
As if we were dead leaves, or desert sand.

PHILIP.
Be comforted, my Lord; for thou hast lost
But what thou hadst not.

ANTIOCHUS.
I, who made the Jews
Skip like the grasshoppers, am made myself
To skip among these stones.

PHILIP.
Be not discouraged.
Thy realm of Syria remains to thee;
That is not lost nor marred.

ANTIOCHUS.
O, where are now
The splendors of my court, my baths and banquets?
Where are my players and my dancing women?
Where are my sweet musicians with their pipes,
That made me merry in the olden time?
I am a laughing-stock to man and brute.
The very camels, with their ugly faces,
Mock me and laugh at me.

PHILIP.
Alas! my Lord,
It is not so.  If thou wouldst sleep awhile,
All would be well.

ANTIOCHUS.
Sleep from mine eyes is gone,
And my heart faileth me for very care.
Dost thou remember, Philip, the old fable
Told us when we were boys, in which the bear
Going for honey overturns the hive,
And is stung blind by bees?  I am that beast,
Stung by the Persian swarms of Elymais.

PHILIP.
When thou art come again to Antioch
These thoughts will be as covered and forgotten
As are the tracks of Pharaoh's chariot-wheels
In the Egyptian sands.

ANTIOCHUS.
Ah! when I come
Again to Antioch!  When will that be?
Alas! alas!


SCENE II -- ANTIOCHUS; PHILIP; A MESSENGER

MESSENGER.
May the King live forever!

ANTIOCHUS.
Who art thou, and whence comest thou?

MESSENGER.
My Lord,
I am a messenger from Antioch,
Sent here by Lysias.

ANTIOCHUS.
A strange foreboding
Of something evil overshadows me.
I am no reader of the Jewish Scriptures;
I know not Hebrew; but my High-Priest Jason,
As I remember, told me of a Prophet
Who saw a little cloud rise from the sea
Like a man's hand and soon the heaven was black
With clouds and rain.  Here, Philip, read; I cannot;
I see that cloud.  It makes the letters dim
Before mine eyes.

PHILIP (reading).
"To King Antiochus,
The God, Epiphanes."

ANTIOCHUS.
O mockery!
Even Lysias laughs at me!--Go on, go on.

PHILIP (reading).
"We pray thee hasten thy return.  The realm
Is falling from thee.  Since thou hast gone from us
The victories of Judas Maccabaeus
Form all our annals.  First he overthrew
Thy forces at Beth-horon, and passed on,
And took Jerusalem, the Holy City.
And then Emmaus fell; and then Bethsura;
Ephron and all the towns of Galaad,
And Maccabaeus marched to Carnion."

ANTIOCHUS.
Enough, enough!  Go call my chariot-men;
We will drive forward, forward, without ceasing,
Until we come to Antioch.  My captains,
My Lysias, Gorgias, Seron, and Nicanor,
Are babes in battle, and this dreadful Jew
Will rob me of my kingdom and my crown.
My elephants shall trample him to dust;
I will wipe out his nation, and will make
Jerusalem a common burying-place,
And every home within its walls a tomb!

(Throws up his hands, and sinks into the
arms of attendants, who lay him upon
a bank.)

PHILIP.
Antiochus! Antiochus!  Alas,
The King is ill!  What is it, O my Lord?

ANTIOCHUS.
Nothing.  A sudden and sharp spasm of pain,
As if the lightning struck me, or the knife
Of an assassin smote me to the heart.
'T is passed, even as it came.  Let us set forward.

PHILIP.
See that the chariots be in readiness
We will depart forthwith.

ANTIOCHUS.
A moment more.
I cannot stand.  I am become at once
Weak as an infant.  Ye will have to lead me.
Jove, or Jehovah, or whatever name
Thou wouldst be named,--it is alike to me,--
If I knew how to pray, I would entreat
To live a little longer.

PHILIP.
O my Lord,
Thou shalt not die; we will not let thee die!

ANTIOCHUS.
How canst thou help it, Philip?  O the pain!
Stab after stab.  Thou hast no shield against
This unseen weapon.  God of Israel,
Since all the other gods abandon me,
Help me.  I will release the Holy City.
Garnish with goodly gifts the Holy Temple.
Thy people, whom I judged to be unworthy
To be so much as buried, shall be equal
Unto the citizens of Antioch.
I will become a Jew, and will declare
Through all the world that is inhabited
The power of God!

PHILIP.
He faints.  It is like death.
Bring here the royal litter.  We will bear him
In to the camp, while yet he lives.

ANTIOCHUS.
O Philip,
Into what tribulation am I come!
Alas!  I now remember all the evil
That I have done the Jews; and for this cause
These troubles are upon me, and behold
I perish through great grief in a strange land.

PHILIP.
Antiochus! my King!

ANTIOCHUS.
Nay, King no longer.
Take thou my royal robes, my signet-ring,
My crown and sceptre, and deliver them
Unto my son, Antiochus Eupator;
And unto the good Jews, my citizens,
In all my towns, say that their dying monarch
Wisheth them joy, prosperity, and health.
I who, puffed up with pride and arrogance,
Thought all the kingdoms of the earth mine own,
If I would but outstretch my hand and take them,
Meet face to face a greater potentate,
King Death--Epiphanes--the Illustrious!
                           [Dies.


*****



MICHAEL ANGELO

Michel, piu che mortal, Angel divino. -- ARIOSTO.

Similamente operando all' artista
ch' a l'abito dell' arte e man che trema. -- DANTE, Par. xiii.,
st. 77.



DEDICATION.

Nothing that is shall perish utterly,
  But perish only to revive again
  In other forms, as clouds restore in rain
  The exhalations of the land and sea.
Men build their houses from the masonry
  Of ruined tombs; the passion and the pain
  Of hearts, that long have ceased to beat, remain
  To throb in hearts that are, or are to be.
So from old chronicles, where sleep in dust
  Names that once filled the world with trumpet tones,
  I build this verse; and flowers of song have thrust
Their roots among the loose disjointed stones,
  Which to this end I fashion as I must.
  Quickened are they that touch the Prophet's bones.


PART FIRST.

I.

PROLOGUE AT ISCHIA

The Castle Terrace.  VITTORIA COLONNA, and JULIA GONZAGA.

VITTORIA.
Will you then leave me, Julia, and so soon,
To pace alone this terrace like a ghost?

JULIA.
To-morrow, dearest.

VITTORIA.
                Do not say to-morrow.
A whole month of to-morrows were too soon.
You must not go.  You are a part of me.

JULIA.
I must return to Fondi.

VITTORIA.
                         The old castle
Needs not your presence.  No one waits for you.
Stay one day longer with me.  They who go
Feel not the pain of parting; it is they
Who stay behind that suffer.  I was thinking
But yesterday how like and how unlike
Have been, and are, our destinies.  Your husband,
The good Vespasian, an old man, who seemed
A father to you rather than a husband,
Died in your arms; but mine, in all the flower
And promise of his youth, was taken from me
As by a rushing wind.  The breath of battle
Breathed on him, and I saw his face no more,
Save as in dreams it haunts me.  As our love
Was for these men, so is our sorrow for them.
Yours a child's sorrow, smiling through its tears;
But mine the grief of an impassioned woman,
Who drank her life up in one draught of love.

JULIA.
Behold this locket.  This is the white hair
Of my Vespasian.  This is the flower-of-love,
This amaranth, and beneath it the device
Non moritura.  Thus my heart remains
True to his memory; and the ancient castle,
Where we have lived together, where he died,
Is dear to me as Ischia is to you.

VITTORIA.
I did not mean to chide you.

JULIA.
                         Let your heart
Find, if it can, some poor apology
For one who is too young, and feels too keenly
The joy of life, to give up all her days
To sorrow for the dead.  While I am true
To the remembrance of the man I loved
And mourn for still, I do not make a show
Of all the grief I feel, nor live secluded
And, like Veronica da Gambara,
Drape my whole house in mourning, and drive forth
In coach of sable drawn by sable horses,
As if I were a corpse.  Ah, one to-day
Is worth for me a thousand yesterdays.

VITTORIA.
Dear Julia!  Friendship has its jealousies
As well as love.  Who waits for you at Fondi?

JULIA.
A friend of mine and yours; a friend and friar.
You have at Naples your Fra Bernadino;
And I at Fondi have my Fra Bastiano,
The famous artist, who has come from Rome
To paint my portrait.  That is not a sin.

VITTORIA.
Only a vanity.

JULIA.
               He painted yours.

VITTORIA.
Do not call up to me those days departed
When I was young, and all was bright about me,
And the vicissitudes of life were things
But to be read of in old histories,
Though as pertaining unto me or mine
Impossible.  Ah, then I dreamed your dreams,
And now, grown older, I look back and see
They were illusions.

JULIA.
                 Yet without illusions
What would our lives become, what we ourselves?
Dreams or illusions, call them what you will,
They lift us from the commonplace of life
To better things.

VITTORIA.
          Are there no brighter dreams,
No higher aspirations, than the wish
To please and to be pleased?

JULIA.
                      For you there are;
I am no saint; I feel the world we live in
Comes before that which is to be here after,
And must be dealt with first.

VITTORIA.
                    But in what way?

JULIA.
Let the soft wind that wafts to us the odor
Of orange blossoms, let the laughing sea
And the bright sunshine bathing all the world,
Answer the question.

VITTORIA.
                And for whom is meant
This portrait that you speak of?

JULIA.
                         For my friend
The Cardinal Ippolito.

VITTORIA.
                       For him?

JULIA
Yes, for Ippolito the Magnificent.
'T is always flattering to a woman's pride
To be admired by one whom all admire.

VITTORIA.
Ah, Julia, she that makes herself a dove
Is eaten by the hawk.  Be on your guard,
He is a Cardinal; and his adoration
Should be elsewhere directed.

JULIA.
                            You forget
The horror of that night, when Barbarossa,
The Moorish corsair, landed on our coast
To seize me for the Sultan Soliman;
How in the dead of night, when all were sleeping,
He scaled the castle wall; how I escaped,
And in my night-dress, mounting a swift steed,
Fled to the mountains, and took refuge there
Among the brigands.  Then of all my friends
The Cardinal Ippolito was first
To come with his retainers to my rescue.
Could I refuse the only boon he asked
At such a time, my portrait?

VITTORIA.
                          I have heard
Strange stories of the splendors of his palace,
And how, apparelled like a Spanish Prince,
He rides through Rome with a long retinue
Of Ethiopians and Numidians
And Turks and Tartars, in fantastic dresses,
Making a gallant show. Is this the way
A Cardinal should live?

JULIA.
                      He is so young;
Hardly of age, or little more than that;
Beautiful, generous, fond of arts and letters,
A poet, a musician, and a scholar;
Master of many languages, and a player
On many instruments.  In Rome, his palace
Is the asylum of all men distinguished
In art or science, and all Florentines
Escaping from the tyranny of his cousin,
Duke Alessandro.

VITTORIA.
              I have seen his portrait,
Painted by Titian.  You have painted it
In brighter colors.

JULIA.
                    And my Cardinal,
At Itri, in the courtyard of his palace,
Keeps a tame lion!

VITTORIA.
                   And so counterfeits
St. Mark, the Evangelist!

JULIA.
                    Ah, your tame lion
Is Michael Angelo.

VITTORIA.
                   You speak a name
That always thrills me with a noble sound,
As of a trumpet!  Michael Angelo!
A lion all men fear and none can tame;
A man that all men honor, and the model
That all should follow; one who works and prays,
For work is prayer, and consecrates his life
To the sublime ideal of his art,
Till art and life are one; a man who holds
Such place in all men's thoughts, that when they speak
Of great things done, or to be done, his name
Is ever on their lips.

JULIA.
                   You too can paint
The portrait of your hero, and in colors
Brighter than Titian's; I might warn you also
Against the dangers that beset your path;
But I forbear.

VITTORIA.
             If I were made of marble,
Of Fior di Persico or Pavonazzo,
He might admire me: being but flesh and blood,
I am no more to him than other women;
That is, am nothing.

JULIA.
           Does he ride through Rome
Upon his little mule, as he was wont,
With his slouched hat, and boots of Cordovan,
As when I saw him last?

VITTORIA.
                     Pray do not jest.
I cannot couple with his noble name
A trivial word!  Look, how the setting sun
Lights up Castel-a-mare and Sorrento,
And changes Capri to a purple cloud!
And there Vesuvius with its plume of smoke,
And the great city stretched upon the shore
As in a dream!

JULIA.
               Parthenope the Siren!

VITTORIA.
And yon long line of lights, those sunlit windows
Blaze like the torches carried in procession
To do her honor!  It is beautiful!

JULIA.
I have no heart to feel the beauty of it!
My feet are weary, pacing up and down
These level flags, and wearier still my thoughts
Treading the broken pavement of the Past,
It is too sad.  I will go in and rest,
And make me ready for to-morrow's journey.

VITTORIA.
I will go with you; for I would not lose
One hour of your dear presence.  'T is enough
Only to be in the same room with you.
I need not speak to you, nor hear you speak;
If I but see you, I am satisfied.
                         [They go in.



MONOLOGUE: THE LAST JUDGMENT

MICHAEL ANGELO's Studio.  He is at work on the cartoon of the
Last Judgment.


MICHAEL ANGELO.
Why did the Pope and his ten Cardinals
Come here to lay this heavy task upon me?
Were not the paintings on the Sistine ceiling
Enough for them?  They saw the Hebrew leader
Waiting, and clutching his tempestuous beard,
But heeded not.  The bones of Julius
Shook in their sepulchre.  I heard the sound;
They only heard the sound of their own voices.

Are there no other artists here in Rome
To do this work, that they must needs seek me?
Fra Bastian, my Era Bastian, might have done it;
But he is lost to art. The Papal Seals,
Like leaden weights upon a dead man's eyes,
Press down his lids; and so the burden falls
On Michael Angelo, Chief Architect
And Painter of the Apostolic Palace.
That is the title they cajole me with,
To make me do their work and leave my own;
But having once begun, I turn not back.
Blow, ye bright angels, on your golden trumpets
To the four corners of the earth, and wake
The dead to judgment!  Ye recording angels,
Open your books and read?  Ye dead awake!
Rise from your graves, drowsy and drugged with death,
As men who suddenly aroused from sleep
Look round amazed, and know not where they are!

In happy hours, when the imagination
Wakes like a wind at midnight, and the soul
Trembles in all its leaves, it is a joy
To be uplifted on its wings, and listen
To the prophetic voices in the air
That call us onward.  Then the work we do
Is a delight, and the obedient hand
Never grows weary.  But how different is it
En the disconsolate, discouraged hours,
When all the wisdom of the world appears
As trivial as the gossip of a nurse
In a sick-room, and all our work seems useless,

What is it guides my hand, what thoughts possess me,
That I have drawn her face among the angels,
Where she will be hereafter?  O sweet dreams,
That through the vacant chambers of my heart
Walk in the silence, as familiar phantoms
Frequent an ancient house, what will ye with me?
'T is said that Emperors write their names in green
When under age, but when of age in purple.
So Love, the greatest Emperor of them all,
Writes his in green at first, but afterwards
In the imperial purple of our blood.
First love or last love,--which of these two passions
Is more omnipotent?  Which is more fair,
The star of morning or the evening star?
The sunrise or the sunset of the heart?
The hour when we look forth to the unknown,
And the advancing day consumes the shadows,
Or that when all the landscape of our lives
Lies stretched behind us, and familiar places
Gleam in the distance, and sweet memories
Rise like a tender haze, and magnify
The objects we behold, that soon must vanish?

What matters it to me, whose countenance
Is like the Laocoon's, full of pain; whose forehead
Is a ploughed harvest-field, where three-score years
Have sown in sorrow and have reaped in anguish;
To me, the artisan, to whom all women
Have been as if they were not, or at most
A sudden rush of pigeons in the air,
A flutter of wings, a sound, and then a silence?
I am too old for love; I am too old
To flatter and delude myself with visions
Of never-ending friendship with fair women,
Imaginations, fantasies, illusions,
In which the things that cannot be take shape,
And seem to be, and for the moment are.
                  [Convent bells ring.

Distant and near and low and loud the bells,
Dominican, Benedictine, and Franciscan,
Jangle and wrangle in their airy towers,
Discordant as the brotherhoods themselves
In their dim cloisters.  The descending sun
Seems to caress the city that he loves,
And crowns it with the aureole of a saint.
I will go forth and breathe the air a while.


II.

SAN SILVESTRO

A Chapel in the Church of San Silvestra on Monte Cavallo.

VITTORIA COLONNA, CLAUDIO TOLOMMEI, and others.

VITTORIA.
Here let us rest a while, until the crowd
Has left the church.  I have already sent
For Michael Angelo to join us here.

MESSER CLAUDIO.
After Fra Bernardino's wise discourse
On the Pauline Epistles, certainly
Some words of Michael Angelo on Art
Were not amiss, to bring us back to earth.

MICHAEL ANGELO, at the door.
How like a Saint or Goddess she appears;
Diana or Madonna, which I know not!
In attitude and aspect formed to be
At once the artist's worship and despair!

VITTORIA.
Welcome, Maestro.  We were waiting for you.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I met your messenger upon the way,
And hastened hither.

VITTORIA.
                     It is kind of you
To come to us, who linger here like gossips
Wasting the afternoon in idle talk.
These are all friends of mine and friends of yours.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
If friends of yours, then are they friends of mine.
Pardon me, gentlemen.  But when I entered
I saw but the Marchesa.

VITTORIA.
                       Take this seat
Between me and Ser Claudio Tolommei,
Who still maintains that our Italian tongue
Should be called Tuscan.  But for that offence
We will not quarrel with him.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                         Eccellenza--

VITTORIA.
Ser Claudio has banished Eccellenza
And all such titles from the Tuscan tongue.

MESSER CLAUDIO.
'T is the abuse of them and not the use
I deprecate.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
            The use or the abuse
It matters not.  Let them all go together,
As empty phrases and frivolities,
And common as gold-lace upon the collar
Of an obsequious lackey.

VITTORIA.
                        That may be,
But something of politeness would go with them;
We should lose something of the stately manners
Of the old school.

MESSER CLAUDIO.
                 Undoubtedly.

VITTORlA.
                              But that
Is not what occupies my thoughts at present,
Nor why I sent for you, Messer Michele.
It was to counsel me.  His Holiness
Has granted me permission, long desired,
To build a convent in this neighborhood,
Where the old tower is standing, from whose top
Nero looked down upon the burning city.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
It is an inspiration!

VITTORIA.
                      I am doubtful
How I shall build; how large to make the convent,
And which way fronting.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 Ah, to build, to build!
That is the noblest art of all the arts.
Painting and sculpture are but images,
Are merely shadows cast by outward things
On stone or canvas, having in themselves
No separate existence.  Architecture,
Existing in itself, and not in seeming
A something it is not, surpasses them
As substance shadow.  Long, long years ago,
Standing one morning near the Baths of Titus,
I saw the statue of Laocoon
Rise from its grave of centuries, like a ghost
Writhing in pain; and as it tore away
The knotted serpents from its limbs, I heard,
Or seemed to hear, the cry of agony
From its white, parted lips.  And still I marvel
At the three Rhodian artists, by whose hands
This miracle was wrought.  Yet he beholds
Far nobler works who looks upon the ruins
Of temples in the Forum here in Rome.
If God should give me power in my old age
To build for Him a temple half as grand
As those were in their glory, I should count
My age more excellent than youth itself,
And all that I have hitherto accomplished
As only vanity.

VITTORIA.
               I understand you.
Art is the gift of God, and must be used
Unto His glory.  That in art is highest
Which aims at this.  When St. Hilarion blessed
The horses of Italicus, they won
The race at Gaza, for his benediction
O'erpowered all magic; and the people shouted
That Christ had conquered Marnas.  So that art
Which bears the consecration and the seal
Of holiness upon it will prevail
Over all others.  Those few words of yours
Inspire me with new confidence to build.
What think you?  The old walls might serve, perhaps,
Some purpose still.  The tower can hold the bells.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
If strong enough.

VITTORIA.
           If not, it can be strengthened.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I see no bar nor drawback to this building,
And on our homeward way, if it shall please you,
We may together view the site.

VITTORIA.
                         I thank you.
I did not venture to request so much.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Let us now go to the old walls you spake of,
Vossignoria--

VITTORIA.
             What, again, Maestro?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Pardon me, Messer Claudio, if once more
I use the ancient courtesies of speech.
I am too old to change.


III.

CARDINAL IPPOLITO.

A richly furnished apartment in the Palace of CARDINAL IPPOLITO.
Night.

JACOPO NARDI, an old man, alone.

NARDI.
I am bewildered.  These Numidian slaves,
In strange attire; these endless ante-chambers;
This lighted hall, with all its golden splendors,
Pictures, and statues!  Can this be the dwelling
Of a disciple of that lowly Man
Who had not where to lay his head?  These statues
Are not of Saints; nor is this a Madonna,
This lovely face, that with such tender eyes
Looks down upon me from the painted canvas.
My heart begins to fail me.  What can he
Who lives in boundless luxury at Rome
Care for the imperilled liberties of Florence,
Her people, her Republic?  Ah, the rich
Feel not the pangs of banishment.  All doors
Are open to them, and all hands extended,
The poor alone are outcasts; they who risked
All they possessed for liberty, and lost;
And wander through the world without a friend,
Sick, comfortless, distressed, unknown, uncared for.

Enter CARDINAL HIPPOLITO, in Spanish cloak and slouched hat.

IPPOLITO.
I pray you pardon me that I have kept you
Waiting so long alone.

NARDI.
                       I wait to see
The Cardinal.

IPPOLITO.
              I am the Cardinal.
And you?

NARDI.
       Jacopo Nardi.

IPPOLITO.
                  You are welcome
I was expecting you.  Philippo Strozzi
Had told me of your coming.

NARDI.
                       'T was his son
That brought me to your door.

IPPOLITO.
                  Pray you, be seated.
You seem astonished at the garb I wear,
But at my time of life, and with my habits,
The petticoats of a Cardinal would be--
Troublesome; I could neither ride nor walk,
Nor do a thousand things, if I were dressed
Like an old dowager.  It were putting wine
Young as the young Astyanax into goblets
As old as Priam.

NARDI.
                Oh, your Eminence
Knows best what you should wear.

IPPOLITO.
                   Dear Messer Nardi,
You are no stranger to me.  I have read
Your excellent translation of the books
Of Titus Livius, the historian
Of Rome, and model of all historians
That shall come after him.  It does you honor;
But greater honor still the love you bear
To Florence, our dear country, and whose annals
I hope your hand will write, in happier days
Than we now see.

NARDI.
           Your Eminence will pardon
The lateness of the hour.

IPPOLITO.
                The hours I count not
As a sun-dial; but am like a clock,
That tells the time as well by night as day.
So no excuse.  I know what brings you here.
You come to speak of Florence.

NARDI.
                       And her woes.

IPPOLITO.
The Duke, my cousin, the black Alessandro,
Whose mother was a Moorish slave, that fed
The sheep upon Lorenzo's farm, still lives
And reigns.

NARDI.
            Alas, that such a scourge
Should fall on such a city!

IPPOLITO.
                       When he dies,
The Wild Boar in the gardens of Lorenzo,
The beast obscene, should be the monument
Of this bad man.

NARDI.
          He walks the streets at night
With revellers, insulting honest men.
No house is sacred from his lusts.  The convents
Are turned by him to brothels, and the honor
Of women and all ancient pious customs
Are quite forgotten now.  The offices
Of the Priori and Gonfalonieri
Have been abolished.  All the magistrates
Are now his creatures.  Liberty is dead.
The very memory of all honest living
Is wiped away, and even our Tuscan tongue
Corrupted to a Lombard dialect.

IPPOLITO.
And worst of all his impious hand has broken
The Martinella,--our great battle bell,
That, sounding through three centuries, has led
The Florentines to victory,--lest its voice
Should waken in their souls some memory
Of far-off times of glory.

NARDI.
                          What a change
Ten little years have made!  We all remember
Those better days, when Niccola Capponi,
The Gonfaloniere, from the windows
Of the Old Palace, with the blast of trumpets,
Proclaimed to the inhabitants that Christ
Was chosen King of Florence; and already
Christ is dethroned, and slain, and in his stead
Reigns Lucifer!  Alas, alas, for Florence!

IPPOLITO.
Lilies with lilies, said Savonarola;
Florence and France!  But I say Florence only,
Or only with the Emperor's hand to help us
In sweeping out the rubbish.

NARDI.
                             Little hope
Of help is there from him.  He has betrothed
His daughter Margaret to this shameless Duke.
What hope have we from such an Emperor?

IPPOLITO.
Baccio Valori and Philippo Strozzi,
Once the Duke's friends and intimates are with us,
And Cardinals Salvati and Ridolfi.
We shall soon see, then, as Valori says,
Whether the Duke can best spare honest men,
Or honest men the Duke.

NARDI.
                We have determined
To send ambassadors to Spain, and lay
Our griefs before the Emperor, though I fear
More than I hope.

IPPOLITO.
                The Emperor is busy
With this new war against the Algerines,
And has no time to listen to complaints
From our ambassadors; nor will I trust them,
But go myself.  All is in readiness
For my departure, and to-morrow morning
I shall go down to Itri, where I meet
Dante da Castiglione and some others,
Republicans and fugitives from Florence,
And then take ship at Gaeta, and go
To join the Emperor in his new crusade
Against the Turk.  I shall have time enough
And opportunity to plead our cause.

NARDI, rising.
It is an inspiration, and I hail it
As of good omen.  May the power that sends it
Bless our beloved country, and restore
Its banished citizens.  The soul of Florence
Is now outside its gates.  What lies within
Is but a corpse, corrupted and corrupting.
Heaven help us all, I will not tarry longer,
For you have need of rest.  Good-night.

IPPOLITO.
                           Good-night.

Enter FRA SEBASTIANO; Turkish attendants.

IPPOLITO.
Fra Bastiano, how your portly presence
Contrasts with that of the spare Florentine
Who has just left me!

FRA SEBASTIANO.
              As we passed each other,
I saw that he was weeping.

IPPOLITO.
                        Poor old man!

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Who is he?

IPPOLITO.
       Jacopo Nardi.  A brave soul;
One of the Fuoruseiti, and the best
And noblest of them all; but he has made me
Sad with his sadness.  As I look on you
My heart grows lighter.  I behold a man
Who lives in an ideal world, apart
From all the rude collisions of our life,
In a calm atmosphere.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                      Your Eminence
Is surely jesting.  If you knew the life
Of artists as I know it, you might think
Far otherwise.

IPPOLITO.
          But wherefore should I jest?
The world of art is an ideal world,--
The world I love, and that I fain would live in;
So speak to me of artists and of art,
Of all the painters, sculptors, and musicians
That now illustrate Rome.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                     Of the musicians,
I know but Goudimel, the brave maestro
And chapel-master of his Holiness,
Who trains the Papal choir.

IPPOLITO.
               In church this morning,
I listened to a mass of Goudimel,
Divinely chanted.  In the Incarnatus,
In lieu of Latin words, the tenor sang
With infinite tenderness, in plain Italian,
A Neapolitan love-song.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                      You amaze me.
Was it a wanton song?

IPPOLITO.
                   Not a divine one.
I am not over-scrupulous, as you know,
In word or deed, yet such a song as that.
Sung by the tenor of the Papal choir,
And in a Papal mass, seemed out of place;
There's something wrong in it.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
             There's something wrong
In everything.  We cannot make the world
Go right.  'T is not my business to reform
The Papal choir.

IPPOLITO.
               Nor mine, thank Heaven.
Then tell me of the artists.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                            Naming one
I name them all; for there is only one.
His name is Messer Michael Angelo.
All art and artists of the present day
Centre in him.

IPPOLITO.
         You count yourself as nothing!

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Or less than nothing, since I am at best
Only a portrait-painter; one who draws
With greater or less skill, as best he may,
The features of a face.

IPPOLITO.
                      And you have had
The honor, nay, the glory, of portraying
Julia Gonzaga!  Do you count as nothing
A privilege like that?  See there the portrait
Rebuking you with its divine expression.
Are you not penitent?  He whose skilful hand
Painted that lovely picture has not right
To vilipend the art of portrait-painting.
But what of Michael Angelo?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                          But lately
Strolling together down the crowded Corso,
We stopped, well pleased, to see your Eminence
Pass on an Arab steed, a noble creature,
Which Michael Angelo, who is a lover
Of all things beautiful, especially
When they are Arab horses, much admired,
And could not praise enough.

IPPOLITO, to an attendant.
                     Hassan, to-morrow,
When I am gone, but not till I am gone,--
Be careful about that,--take Barbarossa
To Messer Michael Angelo, the sculptor,
Who lives there at Macello dei Corvi,
Near to the Capitol; and take besides
Some ten mule-loads of provender, and say
Your master sends them to him as a present.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
A princely gift.  Though Michael Angelo
Refuses presents from his Holiness,
Yours he will not refuse.

IPPOLITO.
                     You think him like
Thymoetes, who received the wooden horse
Into the walls of Troy.  That book of Virgil
Have I translated in Italian verse,
And shall, some day, when we have leisure for it,
Be pleased to read you.  When I speak of Troy
I am reminded of another town
And of a lovelier Helen, our dear Countess
Julia Gonzaga.  You remember, surely,
The adventure with the corsair Barbarossa,
And all that followed?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
             A most strange adventure;
A tale as marvellous and full of wonder
As any in Boccaccio or Sacchetti;
Almost incredible!

IPPOLITO.
                   Were I a painter
I should not want a better theme than that:
The lovely lady fleeing through the night
In wild disorder; and the brigands' camp
With the red fire-light on their swarthy faces.
Could you not paint it for me?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                             No, not I.
It is not in my line.

IPPOLITO.
                     Then you shall paint
The portrait of the corsair, when we bring him
A prisoner chained to Naples: for I feel
Something like admiration for a man
Who dared this strange adventure.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                         I will do it.
But catch the corsair first.

IPPOLITO.
                          You may begin
To-morrow with the sword.  Hassan, come hither;
Bring me the Turkish scimitar that hangs
Beneath the picture yonder.  Now unsheathe it.
'T is a Damascus blade; you see the inscription
In Arabic: La Allah illa Allah,--
There is no God but God.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                         How beautiful
In fashion and in finish!  It is perfect.
The Arsenal of Venice can not boast
A finer sword.

IPPOLITO.
              You like it? It is yours.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
You do not mean it.

IPPOLITO.
                  I am not a Spaniard,
To say that it is yours and not to mean it.
I have at Itri a whole armory
Full of such weapons.  When you paint the portrait
Of Barbarossa, it will be of use.
You have not been rewarded as you should be
For painting the Gonzaga.  Throw this bauble
Into the scale, and make the balance equal.
Till then suspend it in your studio;
You artists like such trifles.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                        I will keep it
In memory of the donor. Many thanks.

IPPOLITO.
Fra Bastian, I am growing tired of Rome,
The old dead city, with the old dead people;
Priests everywhere, like shadows on a wall,
And morning, noon, and night the ceaseless sound
Of convent bells.  I must be gone from here;
Though Ovid somewhere says that Rome is worthy
To be the dwelling-place of all the Gods,
I must be gone from here.  To-morrow morning
I start for Itri, and go thence by sea
To join the Emperor, who is making war
Upon the Algerines; perhaps to sink
Some Turkish galleys, and bring back in chains
The famous corsair.  Thus would I avenge
The beautiful Gonzaga.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                     An achievement
Worthy of Charlemagne, or of Orlando.
Berni and Ariosto both shall add
A canto to their poems, and describe you
As Furioso and Innamorato.
Now I must say good-night.

IPPOLITO.
                      You must not go;
First you shall sup with me.  My seneschal
Giovan Andrea dal Borgo a San Sepolcro,--
I like to give the whole sonorous name,
It sounds so like a verse of the Aeneid,--
Has brought me eels fresh from the Lake of Fondi,
And Lucrine oysters cradled in their shells:
These, with red Fondi wine, the Caecu ban
That Horace speaks of, under a hundred keys
Kept safe, until the heir of Posthumus
Shall stain the pavement with it, make a feast
Fit for Lucullus, or Fra Bastian even;
So we will go to supper, and be merry.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Beware!  I Remember that Bolsena's eels
And Vernage wine once killed a Pope of Rome!

IPPOLITO.
'T was a French Pope; and then so long ago;
Who knows?--perhaps the story is not true.



IV.

BORGO DELLE VERGINE AT NAPLES

Room in the Palace of JULIA GONZAGA.  Night.

JULIA GONZAGA, GIOVANNI VALDESSO.

JULIA.
Do not go yet.

VALDESSO.
            The night is far advanced;
I fear to stay too late, and weary you
With these discussions.

JULIA.
                     I have much to say.
I speak to you, Valdesso, with that frankness
Which is the greatest privilege of friendship.--
Speak as I hardly would to my confessor,
Such is my confidence in you.

VALDESSO.
                          Dear Countess
If loyalty to friendship be a claim
Upon your confidence, then I may claim it.

JULIA.
Then sit again, and listen unto things
That nearer are to me than life itself.

VALDESSO.
In all things I am happy to obey you,
And happiest then when you command me most.

JULIA.
Laying aside all useless rhetoric,
That is superfluous between us two,
I come at once unto the point and say,
You know my outward life, my rank and fortune;
Countess of Fondi, Duchess of Trajetto,
A widow rich and flattered, for whose hand
In marriage princes ask, and ask it only
To be rejected.  All the world can offer
Lies at my feet.  If I remind you of it,
It is not in the way of idle boasting,
But only to the better understanding
Of what comes after.

VALDESSO.
                God hath given you also
Beauty and intellect; and the signal grace
To lead a spotless life amid temptations,
That others yield to.

JULIA.
                  But the inward life,--
That you know not; 't is known but to myself,
And is to me a mystery and a pain.
A soul disquieted, and ill at ease,
A mind perplexed with doubts and apprehensions,
A heart dissatisfied with all around me,
And with myself, so that sometimes I weep,
Discouraged and disgusted with the world.

VALDESSO.
Whene'er we cross a river at a ford,
If we would pass in safety, we must keep
Our eyes fixed steadfast on the shore beyond,
For if we cast them on the flowing stream,
The head swims with it; so if we would cross
The running flood of things here in the world,
Our souls must not look down, but fix their sight
On the firm land beyond.

JULIA.
                    I comprehend you.
You think I am too worldly; that my head
Swims with the giddying whirl of life about me.
Is that your meaning?

VALDESSO.
                Yes; your meditations
Are more of this world and its vanities
Than of the world to come.

JULIA.
                      Between the two
I am confused.

VALDESSO.
            Yet have I seen you listen
Enraptured when Fra Bernardino preached
Of faith and hope and charity.

JULIA.
                             I listen,
But only as to music without meaning.
It moves me for the moment, and I think
How beautiful it is to be a saint,
As dear Vittoria is; but I am weak
And  wayward, and I soon fall back again
To my old ways, so very easily.
There are too many week-days for one Sunday.

VALDESSO.
Then take the Sunday with you through the week,
And sweeten with it all the other days.

JULIA.
In part I do so; for to put a stop
To idle tongues, what men might say of me
If I lived all alone here in my palace,
And not from a vocation that I feel
For the monastic life, I now am living
With Sister Caterina at the convent
Of Santa Chiara, and I come here only
On certain days, for my affairs, or visits
Of ceremony, or to be with friends.
For I confess, to live among my friends
Is Paradise to me; my Purgatory
Is living among people I dislike.
And so I pass my life in these two worlds,
This palace and the convent.

VALDESSO.
                           It was then
The fear of man, and not the love of God,
That led you to this step.  Why will you not
Give all your heart to God?

JULIA.
                   If God commands it,
Wherefore hath He not made me capable
Of doing for Him what I wish to do
As easily as I could offer Him
This jewel from my hand, this gown I wear,
Or aught else that is mine?

VALDESSO.
                     The hindrance lies
In that original sin, by which all fell.

JULIA.
Ah me, I cannot bring my troubled mind
To wish well to that Adam, our first parent,
Who by his sin lost Paradise for us,
And brought such ills upon us.

VALDESSO.
                        We ourselves,
When we commit a sin, lose Paradise,
As much as he did.  Let us think of this,
And how we may regain it.

JULIA.
                    Teach me, then,
To harmonize the discord of my life,
And stop the painful jangle of these wires.

VALDESSO.
That is a task impossible, until
You tune your heart-strings to a higher key
Than earthly melodies.

JULIA.
                    How shall I do it?
Point out to me the way of this perfection,
And I will follow you; for you have made
My soul enamored with it, and I cannot
Rest satisfied until I find it out.
But lead me privately, so that the world
Hear not my steps; I would not give occasion
For talk among the people.

VALDESSO.
                          Now at last
I understand you fully.  Then, what need
Is there for us to beat about the bush?
I know what you desire of me.

JULIA.
                        What rudeness!
If you already know it, why not tell me?

VALDESSO.
Because I rather wait for you to ask it
With your own lips.

JULIA.
            Do me the kindness, then,
To speak without reserve; and with all frankness,
If you divine the truth, will I confess it.

VALDESSO.
I am content.

JULIA.
               Then speak.

VALDESSO.
                    You would be free
From the vexatious thoughts that come and go
Through your imagination, and would have me
Point out some royal road and lady-like
Which you may walk in, and not wound your feet;
You would attain to the divine perfection,
And yet not turn your back upon the world;
You would possess humility within,
But not reveal it in your outward actions;
You would have patience, but without the rude
Occasions that require its exercise;
You would despise the world, but in such fashion
The world should not despise you in return;
Would clothe the soul with all the Christian graces,
Yet not despoil the body of its gauds;
Would feed the soul with spiritual food,
Yet not deprive the body of its feasts;
Would seem angelic in the sight of God,
Yet not too saint-like in the eyes of men;
In short, would lead a holy Christian life
In such a way that even your nearest friend
Would not detect therein one circumstance
To show a change from what it was before.
Have I divined your secret?

JULIA.
                      You have drawn
The portrait of my inner self as truly
As the most skilful painter ever painted
A human face.

VALDESSO.
          This warrants me in saying
You think you can win heaven by compromise,
And not by verdict.

JULIA
               You have often told me
That a bad compromise was better even
Than a good verdict.

VALDESSO.
                 Yes, in suits at law;
Not in religion.  With the human soul
There is no compromise.  By faith alone
Can man be justified.

JULIA.
                 Hush, dear Valdesso;
That is a heresy.  Do not, I pray you,
Proclaim it from the house-top, but preserve it
As something precious, hidden in your heart,
As I, who half believe and tremble at it.

VALDESSO.
I must proclaim the truth.

JULIA.
                           Enthusiast!
Why must you?  You imperil both yourself
And friends by your imprudence.  Pray, be patient.
You have occasion now to show that virtue
Which you lay stress upon.  Let us return
To our lost pathway.  Show me by what steps
I shall walk in it.
                  [Convent bells are heard.

VALDESSO.
                  Hark! the convent bells
Are ringing; it is midnight; I must leave you.
And yet I linger.  Pardon me, dear Countess,
Since you to-night have made me your confessor,
If I so far may venture, I will warn you
Upon one point.

JULIA.
      What is it?  Speak, I pray you,
For I have no concealments in my conduct;
All is as open as the light of day.
What is it you would warn me of?

VALDESSO.
                      Your friendship
With Cardinal Ippolito.

JULIA.
                       What is there
To cause suspicion or alarm in that,
More than in friendships that I entertain
With you and others?  I ne'er sat with him
Alone at night, as I am sitting now
With you, Valdesso.

VALDESSO.
            Pardon me; the portrait
That Fra Bastiano painted was for him.
Is that quite prudent?

JULIA.
              That is the same question
Vittoria put to me, when I last saw her.
I make you the same answer.  That was not
A pledge of love, but of pure gratitude.
Recall the adventure of that dreadful night
When Barbarossa with two thousand Moors
Landed upon the coast, and in the darkness
Attacked my castle.  Then, without delay,
The Cardinal came hurrying down from Rome
To rescue and protect me.  Was it wrong
That in an hour like that I did not weigh
Too nicely this or that, but granted him
A boon that pleased him, and that flattered me?

VALDESSO.
Only beware lest, in disguise of friendship
Another corsair, worse than Barbarossa,
Steal in and seize the castle, not by storm
But strategy.  And now I take my leave.

JULIA.
Farewell; but ere you go look forth and see
How night hath hushed the clamor and the stir
Of the tumultuous streets.  The cloudless moon
Roofs the whole city as with tiles of silver;
The dim, mysterious sea in silence sleeps;
And straight into the air Vesuvius lifts
His plume of smoke.  How beautiful it is!
                   [Voices in the street.

GIOVAN ANDREA.
Poisoned at Itri.

ANOTHER VOICE.
         Poisoned?  Who is poisoned?

GIOVAN ANDREA.
The Cardinal Ippolito, my master.
Call it malaria.  It was sudden.
                    [Julia swoons.



V.

VITTORIA COLONNA

A room in the Torre Argentina.

VITTORIA COLONNA and JULIA GONZAGA.

VITTORIA.
Come to my arms and to my heart once more;
My soul goes out to meet you and embrace you,
For we are of the sisterhood of sorrow.
I know what you have suffered.

JULIA.
                          Name it not.
Let me forget it.

VITTORIA.
                  I will say no more.
Let me look at you.  What a joy it is
To see your face, to hear your voice again!
You bring with you a breath as of the morn,
A memory of the far-off happy days
When we were young.  When did you come from Fondi?

JULIA.
I have not been at Fondi since--

VITTORIA.
                             Ah me!
You need not speak the word; I understand you.

JULIA.
I came from Naples by the lovely valley
The Terra di Lavoro.

VITTORIA.
                    And you find me
But just returned from a long journey northward.
I have been staying with that noble woman
Renee of France, the Duchess of Ferrara.

JULIA.
Oh, tell me of the Duchess.  I have heard
Flaminio speak her praises with such warmth
That I am eager to hear more of her
And of her brilliant court.

VITTORIA.
                    You shall hear all
But first sit down and listen patiently
While I confess myself.

JULIA.
                      What deadly sin
Have you committed?

VITTORIA.
                  Not a sin; a folly
I chid you once at Ischia, when you told me
That brave Fra Bastian was to paint your portrait.

JULIA
Well I remember it.

VITTORIA.
                  Then chide me now,
For I confess to something still more strange.
Old as I am, I have at last consented
To the entreaties and the supplications
Of Michael Angelo--

JULIA
                    To marry him?

VITTORIA.
I pray you, do not jest with me!  You now,
Or you should know, that never such a thought
Entered my breast.  I am already married.
The Marquis of Pescara is my husband,
And death has not divorced us.

JULIA.
                           Pardon me.
Have I offended you?

VITTORIA.
                No, but have hurt me.
Unto my buried lord I give myself,
Unto my friend the shadow of myself,
My portrait.  It is not from vanity,
But for the love I bear him.

JULIA.
                             I rejoice
To hear these words.  Oh, this will be a portrait
Worthy of both of you!     [A knock.

VITTORIA.
                  Hark! He is coming.

JULIA.
And shall I go or stay?

VITTORIA.
                     By all means, stay.
The drawing will be better for your presence;
You will enliven me.

JULIA.
                    I shall not speak;
The presence of great men doth take from me
All power of speech.  I only gaze at them
In silent wonder, as if they were gods,
Or the inhabitants of some other planet.

Enter MICHAEL ANGELO.

VITTORIA.
Come in.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
          I fear my visit is ill-timed;
I interrupt you.

VITTORIA.
                 No; this is a friend
Of yours as well as mine,--the Lady Julia,
The Duchess of Trajetto.

MICHAEL ANGELO to JULIA.
                        I salute you.
'T is long since I have seen your face, my lady;
Pardon me if I say that having seen it,
One never can forget it.

JULIA.
                         You are kind
To keep me in your memory.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                           It is
The privilege of age to speak with frankness.
You will not be offended when I say
That never was your beauty more divine.

JULIA.
When Michael Angelo condescends to flatter
Or praise me, I am proud, and not offended.

VITTORIA.
Now this is gallantry enough for one;
Show me a little.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 Ah, my gracious lady,
You know I have not words to speak your praise.
I think of you in silence.  You conceal
Your manifold perfections from all eyes,
And make yourself more saint-like day by day.
And day by day men worship you the wore.
But now your hour of martyrdom has come.
You know why I am here.

VITTORIA.
                     Ah yes, I know it,
And meet my fate with fortitude.  You find me
Surrounded by the labors of your hands:
The Woman of Samaria at the Well,
The Mater Dolorosa, and the Christ
Upon the Cross, beneath which you have written
Those memorable words of Alighieri,
"Men have forgotten how much blood it costs."

MICHAEL ANGELO.
And now I come to add one labor more,
If you will call that labor which is pleasure,
And only pleasure.

VITTORIA.
              How shall I be seated?

MICHAEL ANGELO, opening his portfolio.

Just as you are.  The light falls well upon you.

VITTORIA.
I am ashamed to steal the time from you
That should be given to the Sistine Chapel.
How does that work go on?

MICHAEL ANGELO, drawing.
                         But tardily.
Old men work slowly.  Brain and hand alike
Are dull and torpid.  To die young is best,
And not to be remembered as old men
Tottering about in their decrepitude.

VITTORIA.
My dear Maestro! have you, then, forgotten
The story of Sophocles in his old age?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
What story is it?

VITTORIA.
           When his sons accused him,
Before the Areopagus, of dotage,
For all defence, he read there to his Judges
The Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus,--
The work of his old age.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      'T is an illusion
A fabulous story, that will lead old men
Into a thousand follies and conceits.

VITTORIA.
So you may show to cavilers your painting
Of the Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Now you and Lady Julia shall resume
The conversation that I interrupted.

VITTORIA.
It was of no great import; nothing more
Nor less than my late visit to Ferrara,
And what I saw there in the ducal palace.
Will it not interrupt you?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                         Not the least.

VITTORIA.
Well, first, then, of Duke Ercole: a man
Cold in his manners, and reserved and silent,
And yet magnificent in all his ways;
Not hospitable unto new ideas,
But from state policy, and certain reasons
Concerning the investiture of the duchy,
A partisan of Rome, and consequently
Intolerant of all the new opinions.

JULIA.
I should not like the Duke.  These silent men,
Who only look and listen, are like wells
That have no water in them, deep and empty.
How could the daughter of a king of France
Wed such a duke?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
         The men that women marry
And why they marry them, will always be
A marvel and a mystery to the world.

VITTORIA.
And then the Duchess,--how shall I describe her,
Or tell the merits of that happy nature,
Which pleases most when least it thinks of pleasing?
Not beautiful, perhaps, in form and feature,
Yet with an inward beauty, that shines through
Each look and attitude and word and gesture;
A kindly grace of manner and behavior,
A something in her presence and her ways
That makes her beautiful beyond the reach
Of mere external beauty; and in heart
So noble and devoted to the truth,
And so in sympathy with all who strive
After the higher life.

JULIA.
She draws me to her
As much as her Duke Ercole repels me.

VITTORIA.
Then the devout and honorable women
That grace her court, and make it good to be there;
Francesca Bucyronia, the true-hearted,
Lavinia della Rovere and the Orsini,
The Magdalena and the Cherubina,
And Anne de Parthenai, who sings so sweetly;
All lovely women, full of noble thoughts
And aspirations after noble things.

JULIA.
Boccaccio would have envied you such dames.

VITTORIA.
No; his Fiammettas and his Philomenas
Are fitter company for Ser Giovanni;
I fear he hardly would have comprehended
The women that I speak of.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        Yet he wrote
The story of Griselda.  That is something
To set down in his favor.

VITTORIA.
                    With these ladies
Was a young girl, Olympia Morate,
Daughter of Fulvio, the learned scholar,
Famous in all the universities.
A marvellous child, who at the spinning wheel,
And in the daily round of household cares,
Hath learned both Greek and Latin; and is now
A favorite of the Duchess and companion
Of Princess Anne.  This beautiful young Sappho
Sometimes recited to us Grecian odes
That she had written, with a voice whose sadness
Thrilled and o'ermastered me, and made me look
Into the future time, and ask myself
What destiny will be hers.

JULIA.
                     A sad one, surely.
Frost kills the flowers that blossom out of season;
And these precocious intellects portend
A life of sorrow or an early death.

VITTORIA.
About the court were many learned men;
Chilian Sinapius from beyond the Alps,
And Celio Curione, and Manzolli,
The Duke's physician; and a pale young man,
Charles d'Espeville of Geneva, whom the Duchess
Doth much delight to talk with and to read,
For he hath written a book of Institutes
The Duchess greatly praises, though some call it
The Koran of the heretics.

JULIA.
                    And what poets
Were there to sing you madrigals, and praise
Olympia's eyes and Cherubina's tresses?

VITTORIA.
No; for great Ariosto is no more.
The voice that filled those halls with melody
Has long been hushed in death.

JULIA.
               You should have made
A pilgrimage unto the poet's tomb,
And laid a wreath upon it, for the words
He spake of you.

VITTORIA.
          And of yourself no less,
And of our master, Michael Angelo.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Of me?

VITTORIA.
   Have you forgotten that he calls you
Michael, less man than angel, and divine?
You are ungrateful.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
           A mere play on words.
That adjective he wanted for a rhyme,
To match with Gian Bellino and Urbino.

VITTORIA.
Bernardo Tasso is no longer there,
Nor the gay troubadour of Gascony,
Clement Marot, surnamed by flatterers
The Prince of Poets and the Poet of Princes,
Who, being looked upon with much disfavor
By the Duke Ercole, has fled to Venice.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
There let him stay with Pietro Aretino,
The Scourge of Princes, also called Divine.
The title is so common in our mouths,
That even the Pifferari of Abruzzi,
Who play their bag-pipes in the streets of Rome
At the Epiphany, will bear it soon,
And will deserve it better than some poets.

VITTORIA.
What bee hath stung you?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
            One that makes no honey;
One that comes buzzing in through every window,
And stabs men with his sting.  A bitter thought
Passed through my mind, but it is gone again;
I spake too hastily.

JULIA.
                I pray you, show me
What you have done.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
           Not yet; it is not finished.



PART SECOND

I

MONOLOGUE


A room in MICHAEL ANGELO'S house.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Fled to Viterbo, the old Papal city
Where once an Emperor, humbled in his pride,
Held the Pope's stirrup, as his Holiness
Alighted from his mule!  A fugitive
From Cardinal Caraffa's hate, who hurls
His thunders at the house of the Colonna,
With endless bitterness!--Among the nuns
In Santa Catarina's convent hidden,
Herself in soul a nun!  And now she chides me
For my too frequent letters, that disturb
Her meditations, and that hinder me
And keep me from my work; now graciously
She thanks me for the crucifix I sent her,
And says that she will keep it: with one hand
Inflicts a wound, and with the other heals it.
[Reading.

"Profoundly I believed that God would grant you
A supernatural faith to paint this Christ;
I wished for that which I now see fulfilled
So marvellously, exceeding all my wishes.
Nor more could be desired, or even so much.
And greatly I rejoice that you have made
The angel on the right so beautiful;
For the Archangel Michael will place you,
You, Michael Angelo, on that new day
Upon the Lord's right hand!  And waiting that,
How can I better serve you than to pray
To this sweet Christ for you, and to beseech you
To hold me altogether yours in all things."

Well, I will write less often, or no more,
But wait her coming.  No one born in Rome
Can live elsewhere; but he must pine for Rome,
And must return to it.  I, who am born
And bred a Tuscan and a Florentine,
Feel the attraction, and I linger here
As if I were a pebble in the pavement
Trodden by priestly feet.  This I endure,
Because I breathe in Rome an atmosphere
Heavy with odors of the laurel leaves
That crowned great heroes of the sword and pen,
In ages past.  I feel myself exalted
To walk the streets in which a Virgil walked,
Or Trajan rode in triumph; but far more,
And most of all, because the great Colonna
Breathes the same air I breathe, and is to me
An inspiration.  Now that she is gone,
Rome is no longer Rome till she return.
This feeling overmasters me.  I know not
If it be love, this strong desire to be
Forever in her presence; but I know
That I, who was the friend of solitude,
And ever was best pleased when most alone,
Now weary grow of my own company.
For the first time old age seems lonely to me.
      [Opening the Divina Commedia.
I turn for consolation to the leaves
Of the great master of our Tuscan tongue,
Whose words, like colored garnet-shirls in lava,
Betray the heat in which they were engendered.
A mendicant, he ate the bitter bread
Of others, but repaid their meagre gifts
With immortality.  In courts of princes
He was a by-word, and in streets of towns
Was mocked by children, like the Hebrew prophet,
Himself a prophet.  I too know the cry,
Go up, thou bald head! from a generation
That, wanting reverence, wanteth the best food
The soul can feed on.  There's not room enough
For age and youth upon this little planet.
Age must give way.  There was not room enough
Even for this great poet.  In his song
I hear reverberate the gates of Florence,
Closing upon him, never more to open;
But mingled with the sound are melodies
Celestial from the gates of paradise.
He came, and he is gone.  The people knew not
What manner of man was passing by their doors,
Until he passed no more; but in his vision
He saw the torments and beatitudes
Of souls condemned or pardoned, and hath left
Behind him this sublime Apocalypse.

I strive in vain to draw here on the margin
The face of Beatrice.  It is not hers,
But the Colonna's.  Each hath his ideal,
The image of some woman excellent,
That is his guide.  No Grecian art, nor Roman,
Hath yet revealed such loveliness as hers.


II

VITERBO

VITTORIA COLONNA at the convent window.

VITTORIA.
Parting with friends is temporary death,
As all death is.  We see no more their faces,
Nor hear their voices, save in memory;
But messages of love give us assurance
That we are not forgotten.  Who shall say
That from the world of spirits comes no greeting,
No message of remembrance?  It may be
The thoughts that visit us, we know not whence,
Sudden as inspiration, are the whispers
Of disembodied spirits, speaking to us
As friends, who wait outside a prison wall,
Through the barred windows speak to those within.
                                  [A pause.

As quiet as the lake that lies beneath me,
As quiet as the tranquil sky above me,
As quiet as a heart that beats no more,
This convent seems.  Above, below, all peace!
Silence and solitude, the soul's best friends,
Are with me here, and the tumultuous world
Makes no more noise than the remotest planet.
O gentle spirit, unto the third circle
Of heaven among the blessed souls ascended,
Who, living in the faith and dying for it,
Have gone to their reward, I do not sigh
For thee as being dead, but for myself
That I am still alive.  Turn those dear eyes,
Once so benignant to me, upon mine,
That open to their tears such uncontrolled
And such continual issue.  Still awhile
Have patience; I will come to thee at last.
A few more goings in and out these doors,
A few more chimings of these convent bells,
A few more prayers, a few more sighs and tears,
And the long agony of this life will end,
And I shall be with thee.  If I am wanting
To thy well-being, as thou art to mine,
Have patience; I will come to thee at last.
Ye minds that loiter in these cloister gardens,
Or wander far above the city walls,
Bear unto him this message, that I ever
Or speak or think of him, or weep for him.

By unseen hands uplifted in the light
Of sunset, yonder solitary cloud
Floats, with its white apparel blown abroad,
And wafted up to heaven.  It fades away,
And melts into the air.  Ah, would that I
Could thus be wafted unto thee, Francesco,
A cloud of white, an incorporeal spirit!



III

MICHAEL ANGELO AND BENVENUTO CELLINI

MICHAEL ANGELO, BENVENUTO CELLINI in gay attire.

BENVENUTO.
A good day and good year to the divine
Maestro Michael Angelo, the sculptor!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Welcome, my Benvenuto.

BENVENUTO.
                       That is what
My father said, the first time he beheld
This handsome face.  But say farewell, not welcome.
I come to take my leave.  I start for Florence
As fast as horse can carry me.  I long
To set once more upon its level flags
These feet, made sore by your vile Roman pavements.
Come with me; you are wanted there in Florence.
The Sacristy is not finished.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       Speak not of it!
How damp and cold it was!  How my bones ached
And my head reeled, when I was working there!
I am too old.  I will stay here in Rome,
Where all is old and crumbling, like myself,
To hopeless ruin.  All roads lead to Rome.

BENVENUTO.
And all lead out of it.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    There is a charm,
A certain something in the atmosphere,
That all men feel, and no man can describe.

BENVENUTO.
Malaria?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
          Yes, malaria of the mind,
Out of this tomb of the majestic Past!
The fever to accomplish some great work
That will not let us sleep.  I must go on
Until I die.

BENVENUTO.
Do you ne'er think of Florence?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       Yes; whenever
I think of anything beside my work,
I think of Florence.  I remember, too,
The bitter days I passed among the quarries
Of Seravezza and Pietrasanta;
Road-building in the marshes; stupid people,
And cold and rain incessant, and mad gusts
Of mountain wind, like howling dervishes,
That spun and whirled the eddying snow about them
As if it were a garment; aye, vexations
And troubles of all kinds, that ended only
In loss of time and money.

BENVENUTO.
                        True; Maestro,
But that was not in Florence.  You should leave
Such work to others.  Sweeter memories
Cluster about you, in the pleasant city
Upon the Arno.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
             In my waking dreams
I see the marvellous dome of Brunelleschi,
Ghiberti's gates of bronze, and Giotto's tower;
And Ghirlandajo's lovely Benci glides
With folded hands amid my troubled thoughts,
A splendid vision!  Time rides with the old
At a great pace.  As travellers on swift steeds
See the near landscape fly and flow behind them,
While the remoter fields and dim horizons
Go with them, and seem wheeling round to meet them,
So in old age things near us slip away,
And distant things go with as.  Pleasantly
Come back to me the days when, as a youth,
I walked with Ghirlandajo in the gardens
Of Medici, and saw the antique statues,
The forms august of gods and godlike men,
And the great world of art revealed itself
To my young eyes.  Then all that man hath done
Seemed possible to me.  Alas! how little
Of all I dreamed of has my hand achieved!

BENVENUTO.
Nay, let the Night and Morning, let Lorenzo
And Julian in the Sacristy at Florence,
Prophets and Sibyls in the Sistine Chapel,
And the Last Judgment answer.  Is it finished?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
The work is nearly done.  But this Last Judgment
Has been the cause of more vexation to me
Than it will be of honor.  Ser Biagio,
Master of ceremonies at the Papal court,
A man punctilious and over nice,
Calls it improper; says that those nude forms,
Showing their nakedness in such shameless fashion,
Are better suited to a common bagnio,
Or wayside wine-shop, than a Papal Chapel.
To punish him I painted him as Minos
And leave him there as master of ceremonies
In the Infernal Regions.  What would you
Have done to such a man?

BENVENUTO.
             I would have killed him.
When any one insults me, if I can
I kill him, kill him.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     Oh, you gentlemen,
Who dress in silks and velvets, and wear swords,
Are ready with your weapon; and have all
A taste for homicide.

BENVENUTO.
                  I learned that lesson
Under Pope Clement at the siege of Rome,
Some twenty years ago.  As I was standing
Upon the ramparts of the Campo Santo
With Alessandro Bene, I beheld
A sea of fog, that covered all the plain,
And hid from us the foe; when suddenly,
A misty figure, like an apparition,
Rose up above the fog, as if on horseback.
At this I aimed my arquebus, and fired.
The figure vanished; and there rose a cry
Out of the darkness, long and fierce and loud,
With imprecations in all languages.
It was the Constable of France, the Bourbon,
That I had slain.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
       Rome should be grateful to you.

BENVENUTO.
But has not been; you shall hear presently.
During the siege I served as bombardier,
There in St. Angelo.  His Holiness,
One day, was walking with his Cardinals
On the round bastion, while I stood above
Among my falconets.  All thought and feeling,
All skill in art and all desire of fame,
Were swallowed up in the delightful music
Of that artillery.  I saw far off,
Within the enemy's trenches on the Prati,
A Spanish cavalier in scarlet cloak;
And firing at him with due aim and range,
I cut the gay Hidalgo in two pieces.
The eyes are dry that wept for him in Spain.
His Holiness, delighted beyond measure
With such display of gunnery, and amazed
To see the man in scarlet cut in two,
Gave me his benediction, and absolved me
From all the homicides I had committed
In service of the Apostolic Church,
Or should commit thereafter.  From that day
I have not held in very high esteem
The life of man.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
     And who absolved Pope Clement?
Now let us speak of Art.

BENVENUTO.
                    Of what you will.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Say, have you seen our friend Fra Bastian lately,
Since by a turn of fortune he became
Friar of the Signet?

BENVENUTO.
                 Faith, a pretty artist
To pass his days in stamping leaden seals
On Papal bulls!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
He has grown fat and lazy,
As if the lead clung to him like a sinker.
He paints no more, since he was sent to Fondi
By Cardinal Ippolito to paint
The fair Gonzaga.  Ah, you should have seen him
As I did, riding through the city gate,
In his brown hood, attended by four horsemen,
Completely armed, to frighten the banditti.
I think he would have frightened them alone,
For he was rounder than the O of Giotto.

BENVENUTO.
He must have looked more like a sack of meal
Than a great painter.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  Well, he is not great
But still I like him greatly.  Benvenuto
Have faith in nothing but in industry.
Be at it late and early; persevere,
And work right on through censure and applause,
Or else abandon Art.

BENVENUTO.
                 No man works harder
Then I do.  I am not a moment idle.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
And what have you to show me?

BENVENUTO.
                    This gold ring,
Made for his Holiness,--my latest work,
And I am proud of it.  A single diamond
Presented by the Emperor to the Pope.
Targhetta of Venice set and tinted it;
I have reset it, and retinted it
Divinely, as you see.  The jewellers
Say I've surpassed Targhetta.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      Let me see it.
A pretty jewel.

BENVENUTO.
           That is not the expression.
Pretty is not a very pretty word
To be applied to such a precious stone,
Given by an Emperor to a Pope, and set
By Benvenuto!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 Messer Benvenuto,
I lose all patience with you; for the gifts
That God hath given you are of such a kind,
They should be put to far more noble uses
Than setting diamonds for the Pope of Rome.
You can do greater things.

BENVENUTO.
             The God who made me
Knows why he made me what I am,--a goldsmith,
A mere artificer.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  Oh no; an artist
Richly endowed by nature, but who wraps
His talent in a napkin, and consumes
His life in vanities.

BENVENUTO.
                    Michael Angelo
May say what Benvenuto would not bear
From any other man.  He speaks the truth.
I know my life is wasted and consumed
In vanities; but I have better hours
And higher aspirations than you think.
Once, when a prisoner at St. Angelo,
Fasting and praying in the midnight darkness,
In a celestial vision I beheld
A crucifix in the sun, of the same substance
As is the sun itself.  And since that hour
There is a splendor round about my head,
That may be seen at sunrise and at sunset
Above my shadow on the grass.  And now
I know that I am in the grace of God,
And none henceforth can harm me.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      None but one,--
None but yourself, who are your greatest foe.
He that respects himself is safe from others;
He wears a coat of mail that none can pierce.

BENVENUTO.
I always wear one.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    O incorrigible!
At least, forget not the celestial vision.
Man must have something higher than himself
To think of.

BENVENUTO.
   That I know full well.  Now listen.
I have been sent for into France, where grow
The Lilies that illumine heaven and earth,
And carry in mine equipage the model
Of a most marvellous golden salt-cellar
For the king's table; and here in my brain
A statue of Mars Armipotent for the fountain
Of Fontainebleau, colossal, wonderful.
I go a goldsmith, to return a sculptor.
And so farewell, great Master.  Think of me
As one who, in the midst of all his follies,
Had also his ambition, and aspired
To better things.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               Do not forget the vision.

[Sitting down again to the Divina Commedia.

Now in what circle of his poem sacred
Would the great Florentine have placed this man?
Whether in Phlegethon, the river of blood,
Or in the fiery belt of Purgatory,
I know not, but most surely not with those
Who walk in leaden cloaks.  Though he is one
Whose passions, like a potent alkahest,
Dissolve his better nature, he is not
That despicable thing, a hypocrite;
He doth not cloak his vices, nor deny them.
Come back, my thoughts, from him to Paradise.


IV.

FRA SEBASTIANO DEL PIOMBO

MICHAEL ANGELO; FRA SEBASTIANO DEL PIOMBO.

MICHAEL ANGELO, not turning round.
Who is it?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
          Wait, for I am out of breath
In climbing your steep stairs.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     Ah, my Bastiano,
If you went up and down as many stairs
As I do still, and climbed as many ladders,
It would be better for you.  Pray sit down.
Your idle and luxurious way of living
Will one day take your breath away entirely.
And you will never find it.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                       Well, what then?
That would be better, in my apprehension,
Than falling from a scaffold.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      That was nothing
It did not kill me; only lamed me slightly;
I am quite well again.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                 But why, dear Master,
Why do you live so high up in your house,
When you could live below and have a garden,
As I do?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
         From this window I can look
On many gardens; o'er the city roofs
See the Campagna and the Alban hills;
And all are mine.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
             Can you sit down in them,
On summer afternoons, and play the lute
Or sing, or sleep the time away?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                               I never
Sleep in the day-time; scarcely sleep at night.
I have not time.  Did you meet Benvenuto
As you came up the stair?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                     He ran against me
On the first landing, going at full speed;
Dressed like the Spanish captain in a play,
With his long rapier and his short red cloak.
Why hurry through the world at such a pace?
Life will not be too long.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      It is his nature,--
A restless spirit, that consumes itself
With useless agitations.  He o'erleaps
The goal he aims at.  Patience is a plant
That grows not in all gardens.  You are made
Of quite another clay.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                   And thank God for it.
And now, being somewhat rested, I will tell you
Why I have climbed these formidable stairs.
I have a friend, Francesco Berni, here,
A very charming poet and companion,
Who greatly honors you and all your doings,
And you must sup with us.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       Not I, indeed.
I know too well what artists' suppers are.
You must excuse me.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                 I will not excuse you.
You need repose from your incessant work;
Some recreation, some bright hours of pleasure.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
To me, what you and other men call pleasure
Is only pain.  Work is my recreation,
The play of faculty; a delight like that
Which a bird feels in flying, or a fish
In darting through the water,--nothing more.
I cannot go.  The Sibylline leaves of life
Grow precious now, when only few remain.
I cannot go.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
              Berni, perhaps, will read
A canto of the Orlando Inamorato.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
That is another reason for not going.
If aught is tedious and intolerable,
It is a poet reading his own verses,

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Berni thinks somewhat better of your verses
Than you of his.  He says that you speak things,
And other poets words.  So, pray you, come.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
If it were now the Improvisatore,
Luigia Pulci, whom I used to hear
With Benvenuto, in the streets of Florence,
I might be tempted.  I was younger then
And singing in the open air was pleasant.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
There is a Frenchman here, named Rabelais,
Once a Franciscan friar, and now a doctor,
And secretary to the embassy:
A learned man, who speaks all languages,
And wittiest of men; who wrote a book
Of the Adventures of Gargantua,
So full of strange conceits one roars with laughter
At every page; a jovial boon-companion
And lover of much wine.  He too is coming.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Then you will not want me, who am not witty,
And have no sense of mirth, and love not wine.
I should be like a dead man at your banquet.
Why should I seek this Frenchman, Rabelais?
And wherefore go to hear Francesco Berni,
When I have Dante Alighieri here.
The greatest of all poets?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                     And the dullest;
And only to be read in episodes.
His day is past.  Petrarca is our poet.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Petrarca is for women and for lovers
And for those soft Abati, who delight
To wander down long garden walks in summer,
Tinkling their little sonnets all day long,
As lap dogs do their bells.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                        I love Petrarca.
How sweetly of his absent love he sings
When journeying in the forest of Ardennes!
"I seem to hear her, hearing the boughs and breezes
And leaves and birds lamenting, and the waters
Murmuring flee along the verdant herbage."

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Enough.  It is all seeming, and no being.
If you would know how a man speaks in earnest,
Read here this passage, where St. Peter thunders
In Paradise against degenerate Popes
And the corruptions of the church, till all
The heaven about him blushes like a sunset.
I beg you to take note of what he says
About the Papal seals, for that concerns
Your office and yourself.

FRA SEBASTIANO, reading.
                 Is this the passage?
"Nor I be made the figure of a seal
To privileges venal and mendacious,
Whereat I often redden and flash with fire!"--
That is not poetry.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    What is it, then?

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Vituperation; gall that might have spirited
From Aretino's pen.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  Name not that man!
A profligate, whom your Francesco Berni
Describes as having one foot in the brothel
And the other in the hospital; who lives
By flattering or maligning, as best serves
His purpose at the time.  He writes to me
With easy arrogance of my Last Judgment,
In such familiar tone that one would say
The great event already had occurred,
And he was present, and from observation
Informed me how the picture should be painted.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
What unassuming, unobtrusive men
These critics are!  Now, to have Aretino
Aiming his shafts at you brings back to mind
The Gascon archers in the square of Milan,
Shooting their arrows at Duke Sforza's statue,
By Leonardo, and the foolish rabble
Of envious Florentines, that at your David
Threw stones at night.  But Aretino praised you.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
His praises were ironical.  He knows
How to use words as weapons, and to wound
While seeming to defend.  But look, Bastiano,
See how the setting sun lights up that picture!

FRA SEBASTIANO.
My portrait of Vittoria Colonna.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
It makes her look as she will look hereafter,
When she becomes a saint!

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                      A noble woman!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Ah, these old hands can fashion fairer shapes
In marble, and can paint diviner pictures,
Since I have known her.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
             And you like this picture.
And yet it is in oil; which you detest.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
When that barbarian Jan Van Eyck discovered
The use of oil in painting, he degraded
His art into a handicraft, and made it
Sign-painting, merely, for a country inn
Or wayside wine-shop.  'T is an art for women,
Or for such leisurely and idle people
As you, Fra Bastiano.  Nature paints not
In oils, but frescoes the great dome of heaven
With sunset; and the lovely forms of clouds
And flying vapors.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
             And how soon they fade!
Behold yon line of roofs and belfries painted
Upon the golden background of the sky,
Like a Byzantine picture, or a portrait
Of Cimabue.  See how hard the outline,
Sharp-cut and clear, not rounded into shadow.
Yet that is nature.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    She is always right.
The picture that approaches sculpture nearest
Is the best picture.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                      Leonardo thinks
The open air too bright.  We ought to paint
As if the sun were shining through a mist.
'T is easier done in oil than in distemper.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Do not revive again the old dispute;
I have an excellent memory for forgetting,
But I still feel the hurt.  Wounds are not healed
By the unbending of the bow that made them.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
So  say Petrarca and the ancient proverb.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
But that is past.  Now I am angry with you,
Not that you paint in oils, but that grown fat
And indolent, you do not paint at all.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Why should I paint?  Why should I toil and sweat,
Who now am rich enough to live at ease,
And take my pleasure?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
              When Pope Leo died,
He who had been so lavish of the wealth
His predecessors left him, who received
A basket of gold-pieces every morning,
Which every night was empty, left behind
Hardly enough to pay his funeral.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
I care for banquets, not for funerals,
As did his Holiness.  I have forbidden
All tapers at my burial, and procession
Of priests and friars and monks; and have provided
The cost thereof be given to the poor!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
You have done wisely, but of that I speak not.
Ghiberti left behind him wealth and children;
But who to-day would know that he had lived,
If he had never made those gates of bronze
In the old Baptistery,--those gates of bronze,
Worthy to be the gates of Paradise.
His wealth is scattered to the winds; his children
Are long since dead; but those celestial gates
Survive, and keep his name and memory green.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
But why should I fatigue myself?  I think
That all things it is possible to paint
Have been already painted; and if not,
Why, there are painters in the world at present
Who can accomplish more in two short months
Than I could in two years; so it is well
That some one is contented to do nothing,
And leave the field to others.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                         O blasphemer!
Not without reason do the people call you
Sebastian del Piombo, for the lead
Of all the Papal bulls is heavy upon you,
And wraps you like a shroud.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                        Misericordia!
Sharp is the vinegar of sweet wine, and sharp
The words you speak, because the heart within you
Is sweet unto the core.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 How changed you are
From the Sebastiano I once knew,
When poor, laborious, emulous to excel,
You strove in rivalry with Badassare
And Raphael Sanzio.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                   Raphael is dead;
He is but dust and ashes in his grave,
While I am living and enjoying life,
And so am victor.  One live Pope is worth
A dozen dead ones.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 Raphael is not dead;
He doth but sleep; for how can he be dead
Who lives immortal in the hearts of men?
He only drank the precious wine of youth,
The outbreak of the grapes, before the vintage
Was trodden to bitterness by the feet of men.
The gods have given him sleep.  We never were
Nor could be foes, although our followers,
Who are distorted shadows of ourselves,
Have striven to make us so; but each one worked
Unconsciously upon the other's thought;
Both giving and receiving.  He perchance
Caught strength from me, and I some greater sweetness
And tenderness from his more gentle nature.
I have but words of praise and admiration
For his great genius; and the world is fairer
That he lived in it.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
                We at least are friends;
So come with me.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
            No, no; I am best pleased
When I'm not asked to banquets.  I have reached
A time of life when daily walks are shortened,
And even the houses of our dearest friends,
That used to be so near, seem far away.

FRA SEBASTIANO.
Then we must sup without you.  We shall laugh
At those who toil for fame, and make their lives
A tedious martyrdom, that they may live
A little longer in the mouths of men!
And so, good-night.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
       Good-night, my Fra Bastiano.

[Returning to his work.

How will men speak of me when I am gone,
When all this colorless, sad life is ended,
And I am dust?  They will remember only
The wrinkled forehead, the marred countenance,
The rudeness of my speech, and my rough manners,
And never dream that underneath them all
There was a woman's heart of tenderness.
They will not know the secret of my life,
Locked up in silence, or but vaguely hinted
In uncouth rhymes, that may perchance survive
Some little space in memories of men!
Each one performs his life-work, and then leaves it;
Those that come after him will estimate
His influence on the age in which he lived.



V

PALAZZO BELVEDERE

TITIAN'S studio. A painting of Danae with a curtain before it.
TITIAN,
MICHAEL ANGELO, and GIORGIO VASARI.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
So you have left at last your still lagoons,
Your City of Silence floating in the sea,
And come to us in Rome.

TITIAN.
                     I come to learn,
But I have come too late.  I should have seen
Rome in my youth, when all my mind was open
To new impressions.  Our Vasari here
Leads me about, a blind man, groping darkly
Among the marvels of the past.  I touch them,
But do not see them.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               There are things in Rome
That one might walk bare-footed here from Venice
But to see once, and then to die content.

TITIAN.
I must confess that these majestic ruins
Oppress me with their gloom.  I feel as one
Who in the twilight stumbles among tombs,
And cannot read the inscriptions carved upon them.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I felt so once; but I have grown familiar
With desolation, and it has become
No more a pain to me, but a delight.

TITIAN.
I could not live here.  I must have the sea,
And the sea-mist, with sunshine interwoven
Like cloth of gold; must have beneath my windows
The laughter of the waves, and at my door
Their pattering footsteps, or I am not happy.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Then tell me of your city in the sea,
Paved with red basalt of the Paduan hills.
Tell me of art in Venice.  Three great names,
Giorgione, Titian, and the Tintoretto,
Illustrate your Venetian school, and send
A challenge to the world.  The first is dead,
But Tintoretto lives.

TITIAN.
                  And paints with fires
Sudden and splendid, as the lightning paints
The cloudy vault of heaven.

GIORGIO.
                      Does he still keep
Above his door the arrogant inscription
That once was painted there,--"The color of Titian,
With the design of Michael Angelo"?

TITIAN.
Indeed, I know not.  'T was a foolish boast,
And does no harm to any but himself.
Perhaps he has grown wiser.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        When you two
Are gone, who is there that remains behind
To seize the pencil falling from your fingers?

GIORGIO.
Oh there are many hands upraised already
To clutch at such a prize, which hardly wait
For death to loose your grasp,--a hundred of them;
Schiavone, Bonifazio, Campagnola,
Moretto, and Moroni; who can count them,
Or measure their ambition?

TITIAN.
                   When we are gone
The generation that comes after us
Will have far other thoughts than ours.  Our ruins
Will serve to build their palaces or tombs.
They will possess the world that we think ours,
And fashion it far otherwise.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                              I hear
Your son Orazio and your nephew Marco
Mentioned with honor.

TITIAN.
           Ay, brave lads, brave lads.
But time will show.  There is a youth in Venice,
One Paul Cagliari, called the Veronese,
Still a mere stripling, but of such rare promise
That we must guard our laurels, or may lose them.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
These are good tidings; for I sometimes fear
That, when we die, with us all art will die.
'T is but a fancy.  Nature will provide
Others to take our places.  I rejoice
To see the young spring forward in the race,
Eager as we were, and as full of hope
And the sublime audacity of youth.

TITIAN.
Men die and are forgotten.  The great world
Goes on the same.  Among the myriads
Of men that live, or have lived, or shall live
What is a single life, or thine or mime,
That we should think all nature would stand still
If we were gone?  We must make room for others.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
And now, Maestro, pray unveil your picture
Of Danae, of which I hear such praise.

TITIAN, drawing hack the curtain.

What think you?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
             That Acrisius did well
To lock such beauty in a brazen tower
And hide it from all eyes.

TITIAN.
                      The model truly
Was beautiful.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
And more, that you were present,
And saw the showery Jove from high Olympus
Descend in all his splendor.

TITIAN.
                        From your lips
Such words are full of sweetness.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      You have caught
These golden hues from your Venetian sunsets.

TITIAN.
Possibly.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
    Or from sunshine through a shower
On the lagoons, or the broad Adriatic.
Nature reveals herself in all our arts.
The pavements and the palaces of cities
Hint at the nature of the neighboring hills.
Red lavas from the Euganean quarries
Of Padua pave your streets; your palaces
Are the white stones of Istria, and gleam
Reflected in your waters and your pictures.
And thus the works of every artist show
Something of his surroundings and his habits.
The uttermost that can be reached by color
Is here accomplished.  Warmth and light and softness
Mingle together.  Never yet was flesh
Painted by hand of artist, dead or living,
With such divine perfection.

TITIAN.
                         I am grateful
For so much praise from you, who are a master;
While mostly those who praise and those who blame
Know nothing of the matter, so that mainly
Their censure sounds like praise, their praise like censure.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Wonderful! wonderful!  The charm of color
Fascinates me the more that in myself
The gift is wanting.  I am not a painter.

GIORGIO.
Messer Michele, all the arts are yours,
Not one alone; and therefore I may venture
To put a question to you.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       Well, speak on.

GIORGIO.
Two nephews of the Cardinal Farnese
Have made me umpire in dispute between them
Which is the greater of the sister arts,
Painting or sculpture.  Solve for me the doubt.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Sculpture and painting have a common goal,
And whosoever would attain to it,
Whichever path he take, will find that goal
Equally hard to reach.

GIORGIO.
                  No doubt, no doubt;
But you evade the question.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        When I stand
In presence of this picture, I concede
That painting has attained its uttermost;
But in the presence of my sculptured figures
I feel that my conception soars beyond
All limit I have reached.

GIORGIO.
                      You still evade me.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Giorgio Vasari, I have often said
That I account that painting as the best
Which most resembles sculpture.  Here before us
We have the proof.  Behold those rounded limbs!
How from the canvas they detach themselves,
Till they deceive the eye, and one would say,
It is a statue with a screen behind it!

TITIAN.
Signori, pardon me; but all such questions
Seem to me idle.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 Idle as the wind.
And now, Maestro, I will say once more
How admirable I esteem your work,
And leave you, without further interruption.

TITIAN.
Your friendly visit hath much honored me.

GIOROIO.
Farewell.

MICHAEL ANGELO to GIORGIO, going out.

         If the Venetian painters knew
But half as much of drawing as of color,
They would indeed work miracles in art,
And the world see what it hath never seen.



VI

PALAZZO CESARINI

VITTORIA COLONNA, seated in an armchair; JULIA GONZAGA, standing
near her.

JULIA.
It grieves me that I find you still so weak
And suffering.

VITTORIA.
         No, not suffering; only dying.
Death is the chillness that precedes the dawn;
We shudder for a moment, then awake
In the broad sunshine of the other life.
I am a shadow, merely, and these hands,
These cheeks, these eyes, these tresses that my husband
Once thought so beautiful, and I was proud of
Because he thought them so, are faded quite,--
All beauty gone from them.

JULIA.
                      Ah, no, not that.
Paler you are, but not less beautiful.

VITTORIA.
Hand me the mirror.  I would fain behold
What change comes o'er our features when we die.
Thank you.  And now sit down beside me here
How glad I am that you have come to-day,
Above all other days, and at the hour
When most I need you!

JULIA.
              Do you ever need me?

VICTORIA.

Always, and most of all to-day and now.
Do you remember, Julia, when we walked,
One afternoon, upon the castle terrace
At Ischia, on the day before you left me?

JULIA.
Well I remember; but it seems to me
Something unreal, that has never been,--
Something that I have read of in a book,
Or heard of some one else.

VITTORIA.
                   Ten years and more
Have passed since then; and many things have happened
In those ten years, and many friends have died:
Marco Flaminio, whom we all admired
And loved as our Catullus; dear Valldesso,
The noble champion of free thought and speech;
And Cardinal Ippolito, your friend.

JULIA.
Oh, do not speak of him!  His sudden death
O'ercomes me now, as it o'ercame me then.
Let me forget it; for my memory
Serves me too often as an unkind friend,
And I remember things I would forget,
While I forget the things I would remember.

VITTORIA.
Forgive me; I will speak of him no more,
The good Fra Bernardino has departed,
Has fled from Italy, and crossed the Alps,
Fearing Caraffa's wrath, because he taught
That He who made us all without our help
Could also save us without aid of ours.
Renee of France, the Duchess of Ferrara,
That Lily of the Loire, is bowed by winds
That blow from Rome; Olympia Morata
Banished from court because of this new doctrine.
Therefore be cautious.  Keep your secret thought
Locked in your breast.

JULIA.
                I will be very prudent
But speak no more, I pray; it wearies you.

VITTORIA.
Yes, I am very weary.  Read to me.

JULIA.
Most willingly.  What shall I read?

VITTORIA.
                            Petrarca's
Triumph of Death.  The book lies on the table;
Beside the casket there.  Read where you find
The leaf turned down.  'T was there I left off reading.

JULIA, reads.

"Not as a flame that by some force is spent,
  But one that of itself consumeth quite,
  Departed hence in peace the soul content,
In fashion of a soft and lucent light
  Whose nutriment by slow gradation goes,
  Keeping until the end its lustre bright.
Not pale, but whiter than the sheet of snows
  That without wind on some fair hill-top lies,
  Her weary body seemed to find repose.
Like a sweet slumber in her lovely eyes,
  When now the spirit was no longer there,
  Was what is dying called by the unwise.
E'en Death itself in her fair face seemed fair"--

Is it of Laura that he here is speaking?--
She doth not answer, yet is not asleep;
Her eyes are full of light and fixed on something
Above her in the air.  I can see naught
Except the painted angels on the ceiling.
Vittoria! speak!  What is it?  Answer me!--
She only smiles, and stretches out her hands.

[The mirror falls and breaks.

VITTORIA.
Not disobedient to the heavenly vision!
Pescara! my Pescara!             [Dies.

JULIA.
                    Holy Virgin!
Her body sinks together,--she is dead!

[Kneels and hides her face in Vittoria's lap.

Enter MICHAEL ANGELO.

JULIA.
Hush! make no noise.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               How is she?

JULIA.
                         Never better.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Then she is dead!

JULIA.
                Alas! yes, she is dead!
Even death itself in her fair face seems fair.
How wonderful!  The light upon her face
Shines from the windows of another world.
Saint only have such faces.  Holy Angels!
Bear her like sainted Catherine to her rest!

[Kisses Vittoria's hand.



PART THIRD

I

MONOLOGUE

Macello de' Corvi.  A room in MICHAEL ANGELO'S house.  MICHAEL
ANGELO, standing before a model of St. Peter's.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Better than thou I cannot, Brunelleschi,
And less than thou I will not!  If the thought
Could, like a windlass, lift the ponderous stones
And swing them to their places; if a breath
Could blow this rounded dome into the air,
As if it were a bubble, and these statues
Spring at a signal to their sacred stations,
As sentinels mount guard upon a wall.
Then were my task completed.  Now, alas!
Naught am I but a Saint Sebaldus, holding
Upon his hand the model of a church,
As German artists paint him; and what years,
What weary years, must drag themselves along,
Ere this be turned to stone!  What hindrances
Must  block the way; what idle interferences
Of Cardinals and Canons of St. Peter's,
Who nothing know of art beyond the color
Of cloaks and stockings, nor of any building
Save that of their own fortunes!  And what then?
I must then the short-coming of my means
Piece out by stepping forward, as the Spartan
Was told to add a step to his short sword.

[A pause.

And is Fra Bastian dead?  Is all that light
Gone out, that sunshine darkened; all that music
And merriment, that used to make our lives
Less melancholy, swallowed up in silence
Like madrigals sung in the street at night
By passing revellers?  It is strange indeed
That he should die before me.  'T is against
The laws of nature that the young should die,
And the old live; unless it be that some
Have long been dead who think themselves alive,
Because not buried.  Well, what matters it,
Since now that greater light, that was my sun,
Is set, and all is darkness, all is darkness!
Death's lightnings strike to right and left of me,
And, like a ruined wall, the world around me
Crumbles away, and I am left alone.
I have no friends, and want none.  My own thoughts
Are now my sole companions,--thoughts of her,
That like a benediction from the skies
Come to me in my solitude and soothe me.
When men are old, the incessant thought of Death
Follows them like their shadow; sits with them
At every meal; sleeps with them when they sleep;
And when they wake already is awake,
And standing by their bedside.  Then, what folly
It is in us to make an enemy
Of this importunate follower, not a friend!
To me a friend, and not an enemy,
Has he become since all my friends are dead.



II

VIGNA DI PAPA GIULIO

POPE JULIUS III. seated by the Fountain of Acqua Vergine,
surrounded by Cardinals.

JULIUS.
Tell me, why is it ye are discontent,
You, Cardinals Salviati and Marcello,
With Michael Angelo?  What has he done,
Or left undone, that ye are set against him?
When one Pope dies, another is soon made;
And I can make a dozen Cardinals,
But cannot make one Michael Angelo.

CARDINAL SALVIATI.
Your Holiness, we are not set against him;
We but deplore his incapacity.
He is too old.

JULIUS.
             You, Cardinal Salviati,
Are an old man.  Are you incapable?
'T is the old ox that draws the straightest furrow.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
Your Holiness remembers he was charged
With the repairs upon St. Mary's bridge;
Made cofferdams, and heaped up load on load
Of timber and travertine; and yet for years
The bridge remained unfinished, till we gave it
To Baccio Bigio.

JULIUS.
                Always Baccio Bigio!
Is there no other architect on earth?
Was it not he that sometime had in charge
The harbor of Ancona.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
                     Ay, the same.

JULIUS.
Then let me tell you that your Baccio Bigio
Did greater damage in a single day
To that fair harbor than the sea had done
Or would do in ten years.  And him you think
To put in place of Michael Angelo,
In building the Basilica of St. Peter!
The ass that thinks himself a stag discovers
His error when he comes to leap the ditch.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
He does not build; he but demolishes
The labors of Bramante and San Gallo.

JULIUS.
Only to build more grandly.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
                      But time passes:
Year after year goes by, and yet the work
Is not completed.  Michael Angelo
Is a great sculptor, but no architect.
His plans are faulty.

JULIUS.
                I have seen his model,
And have approved it.  But here comes the artist.
Beware of him.  He may make Persians of you,
To carry burdens on your backs forever.


SCENE II.

The same: MICHAEL ANGELO.

JULIUS.
Come forward, dear Maestro!  In these gardens
All ceremonies of our court are banished.
Sit down beside me here.

MICHAEL ANGELO, sitting down.
                       How graciously
Your Holiness commiserates old age
And its infirmities!

JULIUS.
                    Say its privileges.
Art I respect.  The building of this palace
And laying out these pleasant garden walks
Are my delight, and if I have not asked
Your aid in this, it is that I forbear
To lay new burdens on you at an age
When you need rest.  Here I escape from Rome
To be at peace.  The tumult of the city
Scarce reaches here.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  How beautiful it is,
And quiet almost as a hermitage!

JULIUS.
We live as hermits here; and from these heights
O'erlook all Rome and see the yellow Tiber
Cleaving in twain the city, like a sword,
As far below there as St. Mary's bridge.
What think you of that bridge?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       I would advise
Your Holiness not to cross it, or not often
It is not safe.

JULIUS.
                It was repaired of late.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Some morning you will look for it in vain;
It will be gone.  The current of the river
Is undermining it.

JULIUS.
                  But you repaired it.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I strengthened all its piers, and paved its road
With travertine.  He who came after me
Removed the stone, and sold it, and filled in
The space with gravel.

JULIUS.
                     Cardinal Salviati
And Cardinal Marcello, do you listen?
This is your famous Nanni Baccio Bigio.

MICHAEL ANGELO, aside.
There is some mystery here.  These Cardinals
Stand lowering at me with unfriendly eyes.

JULIUS.
Now let us come to what concerns us more
Than bridge or gardens.  Some complaints are made
Concerning the Three Chapels in St. Peter's;
Certain supposed defects or imperfections,
You doubtless can explain.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     This is no longer
The golden age of art.  Men have become
Iconoclasts and critics.  They delight not
In what an artist does, but set themselves
To censure what they do not comprehend.
You will not see them bearing a Madonna
Of Cimabue to the church in triumph,
But tearing down the statue of a Pope
To cast it into cannon.  Who are they
That bring complaints against me?

JULIUS.
                              Deputies
Of the commissioners; and they complain
Of insufficient light in the Three Chapels.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Your Holiness, the insufficient light
Is somewhere else, and not in the Three Chapels.
Who are the deputies that make complaint?

JULIUS.
The Cardinals Salviati and Marcello,
Here present.

MICHAEL ANGELO, rising.
         With permission, Monsignori,
What is it ye complain of?

CARDINAL MARCELLO,
                           We regret
You have departed from Bramante's plan,
And from San Gallo's.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               Since the ancient time
No greater architect has lived on earth
Than Lazzari Bramante.  His design,
Without confusion, simple, clear, well-lighted.
Merits all praise, and to depart from it
Would be departing from the truth. San Gallo,
Building about with columns, took all light
Out of this plan; left in the choir dark corners
For infinite ribaldries, and lurking places
For rogues and robbers; so that when the church
Was shut at night, not five and twenty men
Could find them out.  It was San Gallo, then,
That left the church in darkness, and not I.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
Excuse me; but in each of the Three Chapels
Is but a single window.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        Monsignore,
Perhaps you do not know that in the vaulting
Above there are to go three other windows.

CARDINAL SALVIATI.
How should we know?  You never told us of it.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I neither am obliged, nor will I be,
To tell your Eminence or any other
What I intend or ought to do.  Your office
Is to provide the means, and see that thieves
Do not lay hands upon them.  The designs
Must all be left to me.

CARDINAL MARCELLO.
                        Sir architect,
You do forget yourself, to speak thus rudely
In presence of his Holiness, and to us
Who are his cardinals.

MICHAEL ANGELO, putting on his hat.
                       I do not forget
I am descended from the Counts Canossa,
Linked with the Imperial line, and with Matilda,
Who gave the Church Saint Peter's Patrimony.
I, too, am proud to give unto the Church
The labor of these hands, and what of life
Remains to me.  My father Buonarotti
Was Podesta of Chiusi and Caprese.
I am not used to have men speak to me
As if I were a mason, hired to build
A garden wall, and paid on Saturdays
So much an hour.

CARDINAL SALVIATI, aside.
       No wonder that Pope Clement
Never sat down in presence of this man,
Lest he should do the same; and always bade him
Put on his hat, lest he unasked should do it!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
If any one could die of grief and shame,
I should.  This labor was imposed upon me;
I did not seek it; and if I assumed it,
'T was not for love of fame or love of gain,
But for the love of God.  Perhaps old age
Deceived me, or self-interest, or ambition;
I may be doing harm instead of good.
Therefore, I pray your Holiness, release me;
Take off from me the burden of this work;
Let me go back to Florence.

JULIUS.
                         Never, never,
While I am living.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                   Doth your Holiness
Remember what the Holy Scriptures say
Of the inevitable time, when those
Who look out of the windows shall be darkened,
And the almond-tree shall flourish?

JULIUS.
                              That is in
Ecclesiastes.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               And the grasshopper
Shall be a burden, and desire shall fail,
Because man goeth unto his long home.
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher; all
Is vanity.

JULIUS.
            Ah, were to do a thing
As easy as to dream of doing it,
We should not want for artists.  But the men
Who carry out in act their great designs
Are few in number; ay, they may be counted
Upon the fingers of this hand.  Your place
Is at St. Peter's.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                   I have had my dream,
And cannot carry out my great conception,
And put it into act.

JULIUS.
                   Then who can do it?
You would but leave it to some Baccio Bigio
To mangle and deface.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      Rather than that
I will still bear the burden on my shoulders
A little longer.  If your Holiness
Will keep the world in order, and will leave
The building of the church to me, the work
Will go on better for it.  Holy Father,
If all the labors that I have endured,
And shall endure, advantage not my soul,
I am but losing time.

JULIUS, laying his hands on MICHAEL ANGELO'S shoulders.
                    You will be gainer
Both for your soul and body.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                            Not events
Exasperate me, but the funest conclusions
I draw from these events; the sure decline
Of art, and all the meaning of that word:
All that embellishes and sweetens life,
And lifts it from the level of low cares
Into the purer atmosphere of beauty;
The faith in the Ideal; the inspiration
That made the canons of the church of Seville
Say, "Let us build, so that all men hereafter
Will say that we were madmen."  Holy Father,
I beg permission to retire from here.

JULIUS.
Go; and my benediction be upon you.

[Michael Angelo goes out.

My Cardinals, this Michael Angelo
Must not be dealt with as a common mason.
He comes of noble blood, and for his crest
Bear two bull's horns; and he has given us proof
That he can toss with them.  From this day forth
Unto the end of time, let no man utter
The name of Baccio Bigio in my presence.
All great achievements are the natural fruits
Of a great character.  As trees bear not
Their fruits of the same size and quality,
But each one in its kind with equal ease,
So are great deeds as natural to great men
As mean things are to small ones.  By his work
We know the master.  Let us not perplex him.



III

BINDO ALTOVITI

A street in Rome.  BINDO ALTOVITI, standing at the door of his
house.

MICHAEL ANGELO, passing.

BINDO.
Good-morning, Messer Michael Angelo!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Good-morning, Messer Bindo Altoviti!

BINDO.
What brings you forth so early?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        The same reason
That keeps you standing sentinel at your door,--
The air of this delicious summer morning.
What news have you from Florence?

BINDO.
                       Nothing new;
The same old tale of violence and wrong.
Since the disastrous day at Monte Murlo,
When in procession, through San Gallo's gate,
Bareheaded, clothed in rags, on sorry steeds,
Philippo Strozzi and the good Valori
Were led as prisoners down the streets of Florence,
Amid the shouts of an ungrateful people,
Hope is no more, and liberty no more.
Duke Cosimo, the tyrant, reigns supreme.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Florence is dead: her houses are but tombs;
Silence and solitude are in her streets.

BINDO.
Ah yes; and often I repeat the words
You wrote upon your statue of the Night,
There in the Sacristy of San Lorenzo:
"Grateful to me is sleep; to be of stone
More grateful, while the wrong and shame endure;
To see not, feel not, is a benediction;
Therefore awake me not; oh, speak in whispers."

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Ah, Messer Bindo, the calamities,
The fallen fortunes, and the desolation
Of Florence are to me a tragedy
Deeper than words, and darker than despair.
I, who have worshipped freedom from my cradle,
Have loved her with the passion of a lover,
And clothed her with all lovely attributes
That the imagination can conceive,
Or the heart conjure up, now see her dead,
And trodden in the dust beneath the feet
Of an adventurer!  It is a grief
Too great for me to bear in my old age.

BINDO.
I say no news from Florence: I am wrong,
For Benvenuto writes that he is coming
To be my guest in Rome.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               Those are good tidings.
He hath been many years away from us.

BINDO.
Pray you, come in.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               I have not time to stay,
And yet I will.  I see from here your house
Is filled with works of art.  That bust in bronze
Is of yourself.  Tell me, who is the master
That works in such an admirable way,
And with such power and feeling?

BINDO.
                          Benvenuto.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Ah? Benvenuto? 'T is a masterpiece!
It pleases me as much, and even more,
Than the antiques about it; and yet they
Are of the best one sees.  But you have placed it
By far too high.  The light comes from below,
And injures the expression.  Were these windows
Above and not beneath it, then indeed
It would maintain its own among these works
Of the old masters, noble as they are.
I will go in and study it more closely.
I always prophesied that Benvenuto,
With all his follies and fantastic ways,
Would show his genius in some work of art
That would amaze the world, and be a challenge
Unto all other artists of his time.

[They go in.


IV

IN THE COLISEUM

MICHAEL ANGELO and TOMASO DE CAVALIERI

CAVALIERI.
What have you here alone, Messer Michele?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I come to learn.

CAVALIERI.
              You are already master,
And teach all other men.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  Nay, I know nothing;
Not even my own ignorance, as some
Philosopher hath said.  I am a schoolboy
Who hath not learned his lesson, and who stands
Ashamed and silent in the awful presence
Of the great master of antiquity
Who built these walls cyclopean.

CAVALIERI.
                           Gaudentius
His name was, I remember.  His reward
Was to be thrown alive to the wild beasts
Here where we now are standing.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                          Idle tales.

CAVALIERI.
But you are greater than Gaudentius was,
And your work nobler.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                Silence, I beseech you.

CAVALIERI.
Tradition says that fifteen thousand men
Were toiling for ten years incessantly
Upon this amphitheatre.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        Behold
How wonderful it is!  The queen of flowers,
The marble rose of Rome!  Its petals torn
By wind and rain of thrice five hundred years;
Its mossy sheath half rent away, and sold
To ornament our palaces and churches,
Or to be trodden under feet of man
Upon the Tiber's bank; yet what remains
Still opening its fair bosom to the sun,
And to the constellations that at night
Hang poised above it like a swarm of bees.

CAVALIERI.
The rose of Rome, but not of Paradise;
Not the white rose our Tuscan poet saw,
With saints for petals.  When this rose was perfect
Its hundred thousand petals were not Saints,
But senators in their Thessalian caps,
And all the roaring populace of Rome;
And even an Empress and the Vestal Virgins,
Who came to see the gladiators die,
Could not give sweetness to a rose like this.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I spake not of its uses, but its beauty.

CAVALIERI.
The sand beneath our feet is saturate
With blood of martyrs; and these rifted stones
Are awful witnesses against a people
Whose pleasure was the pain of dying men.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Tomaso Cavalieri, on my word,
You should have been a preacher, not a painter!
Think you that I approve such cruelties,
Because I marvel at the architects
Who built these walls, and curved these noble arches?
Oh, I am put to shame, when I consider
How mean our work is, when compared with theirs!
Look at these walls about us and above us!
They have been shaken by earthquake; have been made
A fortress, and been battered by long sieges;
The iron clamps, that held the stones together,
Have been wrenched from them; but they stand erect
And firm, as if they had been hewn and hollowed
Out of the solid rock, and were a part
Of the foundations of the world itself.

CAVALIERI.
Your work, I say again, is nobler work,
In so far as its end and aim are nobler;
And this is but a ruin, like the rest.
Its vaulted passages are made the caverns
Of robbers, and are haunted by the ghosts
Of murdered men.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
            A thousand wild flowers bloom
From every chink, and the birds build their nests
Among the ruined arches, and suggest
New thoughts of beauty to the architect,
Now let us climb the broken stairs that lead
Into the corridors above, and study
The marvel and the mystery of that art
In which I am a pupil, not a master.
All things must have an end; the world itself
Must have an end, as in a dream I saw it.
There came a great hand out of heaven, and touched
The earth, and stopped it in its course.  The seas
Leaped, a vast cataract, into the abyss;
The forests and the fields slid off, and floated
Like wooded islands in the air.  The dead
Were hurled forth from their sepulchres; the living
Were mingled with them, and themselves were dead,--
All being dead; and the fair, shining cities
Dropped out like jewels from a broken crown.
Naught but the core of the great globe remained,
A skeleton of stone.  And over it
The wrack of matter drifted like a cloud,
And then recoiled upon itself, and fell
Back on the empty world, that with the weight
Reeled, staggered, righted, and then headlong plunged
Into the darkness, as a ship, when struck
By a great sea, throws off the waves at first
On either side, then settles and goes down
Into the dark abyss, with her dead crew.

CAVALIERI.
But the earth does not move.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
              Who knows? who knowst?
There are great truths that pitch their shining tents
Outside our walls, and though but dimly seen
In the gray dawn, they will be manifest
When the light widens into perfect day.
A certain man, Copernicus by name,
Sometime professor here in Rome, has whispered
It is the earth, and not the sun, that moves.
What I beheld was only in a dream,
Yet dreams sometimes anticipate events,
Being unsubstantial images of things
As yet unseen.


V

MACELLO DE' CORVI

MICHAEL ANGELO, BENVENUTO CELLINI.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
So, Benvenuto, you return once more
To the Eternal City.  'T is the centre
To which all gravitates.  One finds no rest
Elsewhere than here.  There may be other cities
That please us for a while, but Rome alone
Completely satisfies.  It becomes to all
A second native land by predilection,
And not by accident of birth alone.

BENVENUTO.
I am but just arrived, and am now lodging
With Bindo Altoviti.  I have been
To kiss the feet of our most Holy Father,
And now am come in haste to kiss the hands
Of my miraculous Master.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     And to find him
Grown very old.

BENVENUTO.
        You know that precious stones
Never grow old.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
        Half sunk beneath the horizon,
And yet not gone.  Twelve years are a long while.
Tell me of France.

BENVENUTO.
                 It were too long a tale
To tell you all.  Suffice in brief to say
The King received me well, and loved me well;
Gave me the annual pension that before me
Our Leonardo had, nor more nor less,
And for my residence the Tour de Nesle,
Upon the river-side.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     A princely lodging.

BENVENUTO.
What in return I did now matters not,
For there are other things, of greater moment,
I wish to speak of.  First of all, the letter
You wrote me, not long since, about my bust
Of Bindo Altoviti, here in Rome.  You said,
"My Benvenuto, I for many years
Have known you as the greatest of all goldsmiths,
And now I know you as no less a sculptor."
Ah, generous Master!  How shall I e'er thank you
For such kind language?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     By believing it.
I saw the bust at Messer Bindo's house,
And thought it worthy of the ancient masters,
And said so.  That is all.

BENVENUTO.
                        It is too much;
And I should stand abashed here in your presence,
Had I done nothing worthier of your praise
Than Bindo's bust.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
   What have you done that's better?

BENVENUTO.
When I left Rome for Paris, you remember
I promised you that if I went a goldsmith
I would return a sculptor.  I have kept
The promise I then made.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    Dear Benvenuto,
I recognized the latent genius in you,
But feared your vices.

BENVENUTO.
                I have turned them all
To virtues.  My impatient, wayward nature,
That made me quick in quarrel, now has served me
Where meekness could not, and where patience could not,
As you shall hear now.  I have cast in bronze
A statue of Perseus, holding thus aloft
In his left hand the head of the Medusa,
And in his right the sword that severed it;
His right foot planted on the lifeless corse;
His face superb and pitiful, with eyes
Down-looking on the victim of his vengeance.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I see it as it should be.

BENVENUTO.
                         As it will be
When it is placed upon the Ducal Square,
Half-way between your David and the Judith
Of Donatello.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
              Rival of them both!

BENVENUTO.
But ah, what infinite trouble have I had
With Bandinello, and that stupid beast,
The major-domo of Duke Cosimo,
Francesco Ricci, and their wretched agent
Gorini, who came crawling round about me
Like a black spider, with his whining voice
That sounded like the buzz of a mosquito!
Oh, I have wept in utter desperation,
And wished a thousand times I had not left
My Tour do Nesle, nor e'er returned to Florence,
Or thought of Perseus.  What malignant falsehoods
They told the Grand Duke, to impede my work,
And make me desperate!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     The nimble lie
Is like the second-hand upon a clock;
We see it fly; while the hour-hand of truth
Seems to stand still, and yet it moves unseen,
And wins at last, for the clock will not strike
Till it has reached the goal.

BENVENUTO.
                           My obstinacy
Stood me in stead, and helped me to o'ercome
The hindrances that envy and ill-will
Put in my way.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
               When anything is done
People see not the patient doing of it,
Nor think how great would be the loss to man
If it had not been done.  As in a building
Stone rests on stone, and wanting the foundation
All would be wanting, so in human life
Each action rests on the foregone event,
That made it possible, but is forgotten
And buried in the earth.

BENVENUTO.
                     Even Bandinello,
Who never yet spake well of anything,
Speaks well of this; and yet he told the Duke
That, though I cast small figures well enough,
I never could cast this.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                   But you have done it,
And proved Ser Bandinello a false prophet.
That is the wisest way.

BENVENUTO.
                   And ah, that casting
What a wild scene it was, as late at night,
A night of wind and rain, we heaped the furnace
With pine of Serristori, till the flames
Caught in the rafters over us, and threatened
To send the burning roof upon our heads;
And from the garden side the wind and rain
Poured in upon us, and half quenched our fires.
I was beside myself with desperation.
A shudder came upon me, then a fever;
I thought that I was dying, and was forced
To leave the work-shop, and to throw myself
Upon my bed, as one who has no hope.
And as I lay there, a deformed old man
Appeared before me, and with dismal voice,
Like one who doth exhort a criminal
Led forth to death, exclaimed, "Poor Benvenuto,
Thy work is spoiled!  There is no remedy!"
Then, with a cry so loud it might have reached
The heaven of fire, I bounded to my feet,
And rushed back to my workmen.  They all stood
Bewildered and desponding; and I looked
Into the furnace, and beheld the mass
Half molten only, and in my despair
I fed the fire with oak, whose terrible heat
Soon made the sluggish metal shine and sparkle.
Then followed a bright flash, and an explosion,
As if a thunderbolt had fallen among us.
The covering of the furnace had been rent
Asunder, and the bronze was flowing over;
So that I straightway opened all the sluices
To fill the mould.  The metal ran like lava,
Sluggish and heavy; and I sent my workmen
To ransack the whole house, and bring together
My pewter plates and pans, two hundred of them,
And cast them one by one into the furnace
To liquefy the mass, and in a moment
The mould was filled!  I fell upon my knees
And thanked the Lord; and then we ate and drank
And went to bed, all hearty and contented.
It was two hours before the break of day.
My fever was quite gone.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  A strange adventure,
That could have happened to no man alive
But you, my Benvenuto.

BENVENUTO.
                As my workmen said
To major-domo Ricci afterward,
When he inquired of them: "'T was not a man,
But an express great devil."

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                      And the statue?

BENVENUTO.
Perfect in every part, save the right foot
Of Perseus, as I had foretold the Duke.
There was just bronze enough to fill the mould;
Not a drop over, not a drop too little.
I looked upon it as a miracle
Wrought by the hand of God.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       And now I see
How you have turned your vices into virtues.

BENVENUTO.
But wherefore do I prate of this?  I came
To speak of other things.  Duke Cosimo
Through me invites you to return to Florence,
And offers you great honors, even to make you
One of the Forty-Eight, his Senators.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
His Senators!  That is enough.  Since Florence
Was changed by Clement Seventh from a Republic
Into a Dukedom, I no longer wish
To be a Florentine.  That dream is ended.
The Grand Duke Cosimo now reigns supreme;
All liberty is dead.  Ah, woe is me!
I hoped to see my country rise to heights
Of happiness and freedom yet unreached
By other nations, but the climbing wave
Pauses, lets go its hold, and slides again
Back to the common level, with a hoarse
Death rattle in its throat.  I am too old
To hope for better days.  I will stay here
And die in Rome.  The very weeds, that grow
Among the broken fragments of her ruins,
Are sweeter to me than the garden flowers
Of other cities; and the desolate ring
Of the Campagna round about her walls
Fairer than all the villas that encircle
The towns of Tuscany.

BENVENUTO.
               But your old friends!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
All dead by violence.  Baccio Valori
Has been beheaded; Guicciardini poisoned;
Philippo Strozzi strangled in his prison.
Is Florence then a place for honest men
To flourish in?  What is there to prevent
My sharing the same fate?

BENVENUTO.
                     Why this: if all
Your friends are dead, so are your enemies.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Is Aretino dead?

BENVENUTO.
                 He lives in Venice,
And not in Florence.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                 'T is the same to me
This wretched mountebank, whom flatterers
Call the Divine, as if to make the word
Unpleasant in the mouths of those who speak it
And in the ears of those who hear it, sends me
A letter written for the public eye,
And with such subtle and infernal malice,
I wonder at his wickedness.  'T is he
Is the express great devil, and not you.
Some years ago he told me how to paint
The scenes of the Last Judgment.

BENVENUTO.
                          I remember.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Well, now he writes to me that, as a Christian,
He is ashamed of the unbounded freedom
With which I represent it.

BENVENUTO.
                          Hypocrite!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
He says I show mankind that I am wanting
In piety and religion, in proportion
As I profess perfection in my art.
Profess perfection?  Why, 't is only men
Like Bugiardini who are satisfied
With what they do.  I never am content,
But always see the labors of my hand
Fall short of my conception.

BENVENUTO.
                            I perceive
The malice of this creature.  He would taint you
With heresy, and in a time like this!
'T is infamous!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                I represent the angels
Without their heavenly glory, and the saints
Without a trace of earthly modesty.

BENVENUTO.
Incredible audacity!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                   The heathen
Veiled their Diana with some drapery,
And when they represented Venus naked
They made her by her modest attitude,
Appear half clothed.  But I, who am a Christian,
Do so subordinate belief to art
That I have made the very violation
Of modesty in martyrs and in virgins
A spectacle at which all men would gaze
With half-averted eyes even in a brothel.

BENVENUTO.
He is at home there, and he ought to know
What men avert their eyes from in such places;
From the Last Judgment chiefly, I imagine.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
But divine Providence will never leave
The boldness of my marvellous work unpunished;
And the more marvellous it is, the more
'T is sure to prove the ruin of my fame!
And finally, if in this composition
I had pursued the instructions that he gave me
Concerning heaven and hell and paradise,
In that same letter, known to all the world,
Nature would not be forced, as she is now,
To feel ashamed that she invested me
With such great talent; that I stand myself
A very idol in the world of art.
He taunts me also with the Mausoleum
Of Julius, still unfinished, for the reason
That men persuaded the inane old man
It was of evil augury to build
His tomb while he was living; and he speaks
Of heaps of gold this Pope bequeathed to me,
And calls it robbery;--that is what he says.
What prompted such a letter?

BENVENUTO.
                             Vanity.
He is a clever writer, and he likes
To draw his pen, and flourish it in the face
Of every honest man, as swordsmen do
Their rapiers on occasion, but to show
How skilfully they do it.  Had you followed
The advice he gave, or even thanked him for it,
You would have seen another style of fence.
'T is but his wounded vanity, and the wish
To see his name in print.  So give it not
A moment's thought; it soon will be forgotten.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I will not think of it, but let it pass
For a rude speech thrown at me in the street,
As boys threw stones at Dante.

BENVENUTO.
                    And what answer
Shall I take back to Grand Duke Cosimo?
He does not ask your labor or your service;
Only your presence in the city of Florence,
With such advice upon his work in hand
As he may ask, and you may choose to give.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
You have my answer.  Nothing he can offer
Shall tempt me to leave Rome.  My work is here,
And only here, the building of St. Peter's.
What other things I hitherto have done
Have fallen from me, are no longer mine;
I have passed on beyond them, and have left them
As milestones on the way.  What lies before me,
That is still mine, and while it is unfinished
No one shall draw me from it, or persuade me,
By promises of ease, or wealth, or honor,
Till I behold the finished dome uprise
Complete, as now I see it in my thought.

BENVENUTO.
And will you paint no more?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        No more.

BENVENUTO.
                           'T is well.
Sculpture is more divine, and more like Nature,
That fashions all her works in high relief,
And that is sculpture.  This vast ball, the Earth,
Was moulded out of clay, and baked in fire;
Men, women, and all animals that breathe
Are statues, and not paintings.  Even the plants,
The flowers, the fruits, the grasses, were first sculptured,
And colored later.  Painting is a lie,
A shadow merely.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                Truly, as you say,
Sculpture is more than painting.  It is greater
To raise the dead to life than to create
Phantoms that seem to live.  The most majestic
Of the three sister arts is that which builds;
The eldest of them all, to whom the others
Are but the hand-maids and the servitors,
Being but imitation, not creation.
Henceforth I dedicate myself to her.

BENVENUTO.
And no more from the marble hew those forms
That fill us all with wonder?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                           Many statues
Will there be room for in my work.  Their station
Already is assigned them in my mind.
But things move slowly.  There are hindrances,
Want of material, want of means, delays
And interruptions, endless interference
Of Cardinal Commissioners, and disputes
And jealousies of artists, that annoy me.
But twill persevere until the work
Is wholly finished, or till I sink down
Surprised by death, that unexpected guest,
Who waits for no man's leisure, but steps in,
Unasked and unannounced, to put a stop
To all our occupations and designs.
And then perhaps I may go back to Florence;
This is my answer to Duke Cosimo.


VI

MICHAEL ANGELO'S STUDIO

MICHAEL ANGELO and URBINO.

MICHAEL ANGELO, pausing in his work.
Urbino, thou and I are both old men.
My strength begins to fail me.

URBINO.
                          Eccellenza.
That is impossible.  Do I not see you
Attack the marble blocks with the same fury
As twenty years ago?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                  'T is an old habit.
I must have learned it early from my nurse
At Setignano, the stone-mason's wife;
For the first sounds I heard were of the chisel
chipping away the stone.

URBINO.
                     At every stroke
You strike fire with your chisel.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                           Ay, because
The marble is too hard.

URBINO.
                        It is a block
That Topolino sent you from Carrara.
He is a judge of marble.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                         I remember.
With it he sent me something of his making,--
A Mercury, with long body and short legs,
As if by any possibility
A messenger of the gods could have short legs.
It was no more like Mercury than you are,
But rather like those little plaster figures
That peddlers hawk about the villages
As images of saints.  But luckily
For Topolino, there are many people
Who see no difference between what is best
And what is only good, or not even good;
So that poor artists stand in their esteem
On the same level with the best, or higher.

URBINO.
How Eccellenza laughed!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     Poor Topolino!
All men are not born artists, nor will labor
E'er make them artists.

URBINO.
                        No, no more
Than Emperors, or Popes, or Cardinals.
One must be chosen for it.  I have been
Your color-grinder six and twenty years,
And am not yet an artist.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                       Some have eyes
That see not; but in every block of marble
I see a statue,--see it as distinctly
As if it stood before me shaped and perfect
In attitude and action.  I have only
To hew away the stone walls that imprison
The lovely apparition, and reveal it
To other eyes as mine already see it.
But I grow old and weak.  What wilt thou do
When I am dead, Urbino?

URBINO.
                       Eccellenza,
I must then serve another master.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                               Never!
Bitter is servitude at best.  Already
So many years hast thou been serving me;
But rather as a friend than as a servant.
We have grown old together.  Dost thou think
So meanly of this Michael Angelo
As to imagine he would let thee serve,
When he is free from service?  Take this purse,
Two thousand crowns in gold.

URBINO.
              Two thousand crowns!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Ay, it will make thee rich.  Thou shalt not die
A beggar in a hospital.

URBINO.
                        Oh, Master!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
I cannot have them with me on the journey
That I am undertaking.  The last garment
That men will make for me will have no pockets.

URBINO, kissing the hand of MICHAEL ANGELO.
My generous master!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                   Hush!

URBINO.
                     My Providence!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Not a word more.  Go now to bed, old man.
Thou hast served Michael Angelo.  Remember,
Henceforward thou shalt serve no other master.



VII

THE OAKS OF MONTE LUCA

MICHAEL ANGELO, alone in the woods.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
How still it is among these ancient oaks!
Surges and undulations of the air
Uplift the leafy boughs, and let them fall
With scarce a sound.  Such sylvan quietudes
Become old age.  These huge centennial oaks,
That may have heard in infancy the trumpets
Of Barbarossa's cavalry, deride
Man's brief existence, that with all his strength
He cannot stretch beyond the hundredth year.
This little acorn, turbaned like the Turk,
Which with my foot I spurn, may be an oak
Hereafter, feeding with its bitter mast
The fierce wild boar, and tossing in its arms
The cradled nests of birds, when all the men
That now inhabit this vast universe,
They and their children, and their children's children,
Shall be but dust and mould, and nothing more.
Through openings in the trees I see below me
The valley of Clitumnus, with its farms
And snow-white oxen grazing in the shade
Of the tall poplars on the river's brink.
O Nature, gentle mother, tender nurse!
I who have never loved thee as I ought,
But wasted all my years immured in cities,
And breathed the stifling atmosphere of streets,
Now come to thee for refuge.  Here is peace.
Yonder I see the little hermitages
Dotting the mountain side with points of light,
And here St. Julian's convent, like a nest
Of curlews, clinging to some windy cliff.
Beyond the broad, illimitable plain
Down sinks the sun, red as Apollo's quoit,
That, by the envious Zephyr blown aside,
Struck Hyacinthus dead, and stained the earth
With his young blood, that blossomed into flowers.
And now, instead of these fair deities
Dread demons haunt the earth; hermits inhabit
The leafy homes of sylvan Hamadryads;
And jovial friars, rotund and rubicund,
Replace the old Silenus with his ass.

Here underneath these venerable oaks,
Wrinkled and brown and gnarled like them with age,
A brother of the monastery sits,
Lost in his meditations.  What may be
The questions that perplex, the hopes that cheer him?
Good-evening, holy father.

MONK.
                      God be with you.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Pardon a stranger if he interrupt
Your meditations.

MONK.
                It was but a dream,--
The old, old dream, that never will come true;
The dream that all my life I have been dreaming,
And yet is still a dream.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                    All men have dreams:
I have had mine; but none of them came true;
They were but vanity.  Sometimes I think
The happiness of man lies in pursuing,
Not in possessing; for the things possessed
Lose half their value.  Tell me of your dream.

MONK.
The yearning of my heart, my sole desire,
That like the sheaf of Joseph stands up right,
While all the others bend and bow to it;
The passion that torments me, and that breathes
New meaning into the dead forms of prayer,
Is that with mortal eyes I may behold
The Eternal City.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                Rome?

MONK.
                    There is but one;
The rest are merely names.  I think of it
As the Celestial City, paved with gold,
And sentinelled with angels.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                        Would it were.
I have just fled from it.  It is beleaguered
By Spanish troops, led by the Duke of Alva.

MONK.
But still for me 't is the Celestial City,
And I would see it once before I die.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Each one must bear his cross.

MONK.
                        Were it a cross
That had been laid upon me, I could bear it,
Or fall with it.  It is a crucifix;
I am nailed hand and foot, and I am dying!

MICHAEL ANGELO.
What would you see in Rome?

MONK.
                        His Holiness.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Him that was once the Cardinal Caraffa?
You would but see a man of fourscore years,
With sunken eyes, burning like carbuncles,
Who sits at table with his friends for hours,
Cursing the Spaniards as a race of Jews
And miscreant Moors.  And with what soldiery
Think you he now defends the Eternal City?

MONK.
With legions of bright angels.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     So he calls them;
And yet in fact these bright angelic legions
Are only German Lutherans.

MONK, crossing himself.
                 Heaven protect us?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
What further would you see?

MONK.
                      The Cardinals,
Going in their gilt coaches to High Mass.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
Men do not go to Paradise in coaches.

MONK.
The catacombs, the convents, and the churches;
The ceremonies of the Holy Week
In all their pomp, or, at the Epiphany,
The Feast of the Santissima Bambino
At Ara Coeli.  But I shall not see them.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
These pompous ceremonies of the Church
Are but an empty show to him who knows
The actors in them.  Stay here in your convent,
For he who goes to Rome may see too much.
What would you further?

MONK.
             I would see the painting
of the Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
The smoke of incense and of altar candles
Has blackened it already.

MONK.
                          Woe is me!
Then I would hear Allegri's Miserere,
Sung by the Papal choir.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     A dismal dirge!
I am an old, old man, and I have lived
In Rome for thirty years and more, and know
The jarring of the wheels of that great world,
Its jealousies, its discords, and its strife.
Therefore I say to you, remain content
Here in your convent, here among your woods,
Where only there is peace.  Go not to Rome.
There was of old a monk of Wittenberg
Who went to Rome; you may have heard of him;
His name was Luther; and you know what followed.

[The convent bell rings.

MONK, rising.
It is the convent bell; it rings for vespers.
Let us go in; we both will pray for peace.



VIII

THE DEAD CHRIST.

MICHAEL ANGELO'S studio.  MICHAEL ANGELO, with a light,
working upon the Dead Christ.  Midnight.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
O Death, why is it I cannot portray
Thy form and features?  Do I stand too near thee?
Or dost thou hold my hand, and draw me back,
As being thy disciple, not thy master?
Let him who knows not what old age is like
Have patience till it comes, and he will know.
I once had skill to fashion Life and Death
And Sleep, which is the counterfeit of Death;
And I remember what Giovanni Strozzi
Wrote underneath my statue of the Night
In San Lorenzo, ah, so long ago!

Grateful to me is sleep!  More grateful now
Than it was then; for all my friends are dead;
And she is dead, the noblest of them all.
I saw her face, when the great sculptor Death,
Whom men should call Divine, had at a blow
Stricken her into marble; and I kissed
Her cold white hand.  What was it held me back
From kissing her fair forehead, and those lips,
Those dead, dumb lips?  Grateful to me is sleep!

Enter GIORGIO VASARI.

GIORGIO.
Good-evening, or good-morning, for I know not
Which of the two it is.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                     How came you in?

GIORGIO.
Why, by the door, as all men do.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                              Ascanio
Must have forgotten to bolt it.

GIORGIO.
                            Probably.
Am I a spirit, or so like a spirit,
That I could slip through bolted door or window?
As I was passing down the street, I saw
A glimmer of light, and heard the well-known chink
Of chisel upon marble.  So I entered,
To see what keeps you from your bed so late.

MICHAEL ANGELO, coming forward with the lamp.
You have been revelling with your boon companions,
Giorgio Vasari, and you come to me
At an untimely hour.

GIORGIO.
              The Pope hath sent me.
His Holiness desires to see again
The drawing you once showed him of the dome
Of the Basilica.

MICHAEL ANGELO.
                We will look for it.

GIORGIO.
What is the marble group that glimmers there
Behind you?

MICHAEL ANGELO.
       Nothing, and yet everything,--
As one may take it.  It is my own tomb,
That I am building.

GIORGIO.
              Do not hide it from me.
By our long friendship and the love I bear you,
Refuse me not!

MICHAEL ANGELO, letting fall the lamp.
               Life hath become to me
An empty theatre,--its lights extinguished,
The music silent, and the actors gone;
And I alone sit musing on the scenes
That once have been.  I am so old that Death
Oft plucks me by the cloak, to come with him
And some day, like this lamp, shall I fall down,
And my last spark of life will be extinguished.
Ah me! ah me! what darkness of despair!
So near to death, and yet so far from God!



*****



TRANSLATIONS

PRELUDE

As treasures that men seek,
  Deep-buried in sea-sands,
Vanish if they but speak,
  And elude their eager hands,

So ye escape and slip,
  O songs, and fade away,
When the word is on my lip
  To interpret what ye say.

Were it not better, then,
  To let the treasures rest
Hid from the eyes of men,
  Locked in their iron chest?

I have but marked the place,
  But half the secret told,
That, following this slight trace,
  Others may find the gold.


FROM THE SPANISH

COPLAS DE MANRIQUE.
O let the soul her slumbers break,
Let thought be quickened, and awake;
Awake to see
How soon this life is past and gone,
And death comes softly stealing on,
How silently!

Swiftly our pleasures glide away,
Our hearts recall the distant day
With many sighs;
The moments that are speeding fast
We heed not, but the past,--the past,
More highly prize.

Onward its course the present keeps,
Onward the constant current sweeps,
Till life is done;
And, did we judge of time aright,
The past and future in their flight
Would be as one.

Let no one fondly dream again,
That Hope and all her shadowy train
Will not decay;
Fleeting as were the dreams of old,
Remembered like a tale that's told,
They pass away.

Our lives are rivers, gliding free
To that unfathomed, boundless sea,
The silent grave!
Thither all earthly pomp and boast
Roll, to be swallowed up and lost
In one dark wave.

Thither the mighty torrents stray,
Thither the brook pursues its way,
And tinkling rill,
There all are equal; side by side
The poor man and the son of pride
Lie calm and still.

I will not here invoke the throng
Of orators and sons of song,
The deathless few;
Fiction entices and deceives,
And, sprinkled o'er her fragrant leaves,
Lies poisonous dew.

To One alone my thoughts arise,
The Eternal Truth, the Good and Wise,
To Him I cry,
Who shared on earth our common lot,
But the world comprehended not
His deity.

This world is but the rugged road
Which leads us to the bright abode
Of peace above;
So let us choose that narrow way,
Which leads no traveller's foot astray
From realms of love,

Our cradle is the starting-place,
Life is the running of the race,
We reach the goal
When, in the mansions of the blest,
Death leaves to its eternal rest
The weary soul.

Did we but use it as we ought,
This world would school each wandering thought
To its high state.
Faith wings the soul beyond the sky,
Up to that better world on high,
For which we wait.

Yes, the glad messenger of love,
To guide us to our home above,
The Saviour came;
Born amid mortal cares and fears.
He suffered in this vale of tears
A death of shame.

Behold of what delusive worth
The bubbles we pursue on earth,
The shapes we chase,
Amid a world of treachery!
They vanish ere death shuts the eye,
And leave no trace.

Time steals them from us, chances strange,
Disastrous accident, and change,
That come to all;
Even in the most exalted state,
Relentless sweeps the stroke of fate;
The strongest fall.

Tell me, the charms that lovers seek
In the clear eye and blushing cheek,
The hues that play
O'er rosy lip and brow of snow,
When hoary age approaches slow,
Ah; where are they?

The cunning skill, the curious arts,
The glorious strength that youth imparts
In life's first stage;
These shall become a heavy weight,
When Time swings wide his outward gate
To weary age.

The noble blood of Gothic name,
Heroes emblazoned high to fame,
In long array;
How, in the onward course of time,
The landmarks of that race sublime
Were swept away!

Some, the degraded slaves of lust,
Prostrate and trampled in the dust,
Shall rise no more;
Others, by guilt and crime, maintain
The scutcheon, that without a stain,
Their fathers bore.

Wealth and the high estate of pride,
With what untimely speed they glide,
How soon depart!
Bid not the shadowy phantoms stay,
The vassals of a mistress they,
Of fickle heart.

These gifts in Fortune's hands are found;
Her swift revolving wheel turns round,
And they are gone!
No rest the inconstant goddess knows,
But changing, and without repose,
Still hurries on.

Even could the hand of avarice save
Its gilded baubles till the grave
Reclaimed its prey,
Let none on such poor hopes rely;
Life, like an empty dream, flits by,
And where are they?

Earthly desires and sensual lust
Are passions springing from the dust,
They fade and die;
But in the life beyond the tomb,
They seal the immortal spirits doom
Eternally!

The pleasures and delights, which mask
In treacherous smiles life's serious task,
What are they, all,
But the fleet coursers of the chase,
And death an ambush in the race,
Wherein we fall?

No foe, no dangerous pass, we heed,
Brook no delay, but onward speed
With loosened rein;
And, when the fatal snare is near,
We strive to check our mad career,
But strive in vain.

Could we new charms to age impart,
And fashion with a cunning art
The human face,
As we can clothe the soul with light,
And make the glorious spirit bright
With heavenly grace,

How busily each passing hour
Should we exert that magic power,
What ardor show,
To deck the sensual slave of sin,
Yet leave the freeborn soul within,
In weeds of woe!

Monarchs, the powerful and the strong,
Famous in history and in song
Of olden time,
Saw, by the stern decrees of fate,
Their kingdoms lost, and desolate
Their race sublime.

Who is the champion? who the strong?
Pontiff and priest, and sceptred throng?
On these shall fall
As heavily the hand of Death,
As when it stays the shepherd's breath
Beside his stall.

I speak not of the Trojan name,
Neither its glory nor its shame
Has met our eyes;
Nor of Rome's great and glorious dead,
Though we have heard so oft, and read,
Their histories.

Little avails it now to know
Of ages passed so long ago,
Nor how they rolled;
Our theme shall be of yesterday,
Which to oblivion sweeps away,
Like day's of old.

Where is the King, Don Juan?  Where
Each royal prince and noble heir
Of Aragon?
Where are the courtly gallantries?
The deeds of love and high emprise,
In battle done?

Tourney and joust, that charmed the eye,
And scarf, and gorgeous panoply,
And nodding plume,
What were they but a pageant scene?
What but the garlands, gay and green,
That deck the tomb?

Where are the high-born dames, and where
Their gay attire, and jewelled hair,
And odors sweet?
Where are the gentle knights, that came
To kneel, and breathe love's ardent flame,
Low at their feet?

Where is the song of Troubadour?
Where are the lute and gay tambour
They loved of yore?
Where is the mazy dance of old,
The flowing robes, inwrought with gold,
The dancers wore?

And he who next the sceptre swayed,
Henry, whose royal court displayed
Such power and pride;
O, in what winning smiles arrayed,
The world its various pleasures laid
His throne beside!

But O how false and full of guile
That world, which wore so soft a smile
But to betray!
She, that had been his friend before,
Now from the fated monarch tore
Her charms away.

The countless gifts, the stately walls,
The loyal palaces, and halls
All filled with gold;
Plate with armorial bearings wrought,
Chambers with ample treasures fraught
Of wealth untold;

The noble steeds, and harness bright,
And gallant lord, and stalwart knight,
In rich array,
Where shall we seek them now?  Alas!
Like the bright dewdrops on the grass,
They passed away.

His brother, too, whose factious zeal
Usurped the sceptre of Castile,
Unskilled to reign;
What a gay, brilliant court had he,
When all the flower of chivalry
Was in his train!

But he was mortal; and the breath,
That flamed from the hot forge of Death,
Blasted his years;
Judgment of God! that flame by thee,
When raging fierce and fearfully,
Was quenched in tears!

Spain's haughty Constable, the true
And gallant Master, whom we knew
Most loved of all;
Breathe not a whisper of his pride,
He on the gloomy scaffold died,
Ignoble fall!

The countless treasures of his care,
His villages and villas fair,
His mighty power,
What were they all but grief and shame,
Tears and a broken heart, when came
The parting hour?

His other brothers, proud and high,
Masters, who, in prosperity,
Might rival kings;
Who made the bravest and the best
The bondsmen of their high behest,
Their underlings;

What was their prosperous estate,
When high exalted and elate
With power and pride?
What, but a transient gleam of light,
A flame, which, glaring at its height,
Grew dim and died?

So many a duke of royal name,
Marquis and count of spotless fame,
And baron brave,
That might the sword of empire wield,
All these, O Death, hast thou concealed
In the dark grave!

Their deeds of mercy and of arms,
In peaceful days, or war's alarms,
When thou dost show.
O Death, thy stern and angry face,
One stroke of thy all-powerful mace
Can overthrow.

Unnumbered hosts, that threaten nigh,
Pennon and standard flaunting high,
And flag displayed;
High battlements intrenched around,
Bastion, and moated wall, and mound,
And palisade,

And covered trench, secure and deep,
All these cannot one victim keep,
O Death, from thee,
When thou dost battle in thy wrath,
And thy strong shafts pursue their path
Unerringly.

O World! so few the years we live,
Would that the life which thou dost give
Were life indeed!
Alas! thy sorrows fall so fast,
Our happiest hour is when at last
The soul is freed.

Our days are covered o'er with grief,
And sorrows neither few nor brief
Veil all in gloom;
Left desolate of real good,
Within this cheerless solitude
No pleasures bloom.

Thy pilgrimage begins in tears,
And ends in bitter doubts and fears,
Or dark despair;
Midway so many toils appear,
That he who lingers longest here
Knows most of care.

Thy goods are bought with many a groan,
By the hot sweat of toil alone,
And weary hearts;
Fleet-footed is the approach of woe,
But with a lingering step and slow
Its form departs.

And he, the good man's shield and shade,
To whom all hearts their homage paid,
As Virtue's son,
Roderic Manrique, he whose name
Is written on the scroll of Fame,
Spain's champion;

His signal deeds and prowess high
Demand no pompous eulogy.
Ye saw his deeds!
Why should their praise in verse be sung?
The name, that dwells on every tongue,
No minstrel needs.

To friends a friend; how kind to all
The vassals of this ancient hall
And feudal fief!
To foes how stern a foe was he!
And to the valiant and the free
How brave a chief!

What prudence with the old and wise:
What grace in youthful gayeties;
In all how sage!
Benignant to the serf and slave,
He showed the base and falsely brave
A lion's rage.

His was Octavian's prosperous star,
The rush of Caesar's conquering car
At battle's call;
His, Scipio's virtue; his, the skill
And the indomitable will
Of Hannibal.

His was a Trajan's goodness, his
A Titus' noble charities
And righteous laws;
The arm of Hector, and the might
Of Tully, to maintain the right
In truth's just cause;

The clemency of Antonine,
Aurelius' countenance divine,
Firm, gentle, still;
The eloquence of Adrian,
And Theodosius' love to man,
And generous will;

In tented field and bloody fray,
An Alexander's vigorous sway
And stern command;
The faith of Constantine; ay, more,
The fervent love Camillus bore
His native land.

He left no well-filled treasury,
He heaped no pile of riches high,
Nor massive plate;
He fought the Moors, and, in their fall,
City and tower and castled wall
Were his estate.

Upon the hard-fought battle-ground,
Brave steeds and gallant riders found
A common grave;
And there the warrior's hand did gain
The rents, and the long vassal train,
That conquest gave.

And if, of old, his halls displayed
The honored and exalted grade
His worth had gained,
So, in the dark, disastrous hour,
Brothers and bondsmen of his power
His hand sustained.

After high deeds, not left untold,
In the stern warfare, which of old
'T was his to share,
Such noble leagues he made, that more
And fairer regions, than before,
His guerdon were.

These are the records, half effaced,
Which, with the hand of youth, he traced
On history's page;
But with fresh victories he drew
Each fading character anew
In his old age.

By his unrivalled skill, by great
And veteran service to the state,
By worth adored,
He stood, in his high dignity,
The proudest knight of chivalry,
Knight of the Sword.

He found his cities and domains
Beneath a tyrant's galling chains
And cruel power;
But by fierce battle and blockade,
Soon his own banner was displayed
From every tower.

By the tried valor of his hand,
His monarch and his native land
Were nobly served;
Let Portugal repeat the story,
And proud Castile, who shared the glory
His arms deserved.

And when so oft, for weal or woe,
His life upon the fatal throw
Had been cast down;
When he had served, with patriot zeal,
Beneath the banner of Castile,
His sovereign's crown;

And done such deeds of valor strong,
That neither history nor song
Can count them all;
Then, on Ocana's castled rock,
Death at his portal came to knock,
With sudden call,

Saying, "Good Cavalier, prepare
To leave this world of toil and care
With joyful mien;
Let thy strong heart of steel this day
Put on its armor for the fray,
The closing scene.

"Since thou hast been, in battle-strife,
So prodigal of health and life,
For earthly fame,
Let virtue nerve thy heart again;
Loud on the last stern battle-plain
They call thy name.

"Think not the struggle that draws near
Too terrible for man, nor fear
To meet the foe;
Nor let thy noble spirit grieve,
Its life of glorious fame to leave
On earth below.

"A life of honor and of worth
Has no eternity on earth,
'T is but a name;
And yet its glory far exceeds
That base and sensual life, which leads
To want and shame.

"The eternal life, beyond the sky,
Wealth cannot purchase, nor the high
And proud estate;
The soul in dalliance laid, the spirit
Corrupt with sin, shall not inherit
A joy so great.

"But the good monk, in cloistered cell,
Shall gain it by his book and bell,
His prayers and tears;
And the brave knight, whose arm endures
Fierce battle, and against the Moors
His standard rears.

"And thou, brave knight, whose hand has poured
The life-blood of the Pagan horde
O'er all the land,
In heaven shalt thou receive, at length,
The guerdon of thine earthly strength
And dauntless hand.

"Cheered onward by this promise sure,
Strong in the faith entire and pure
Thou dost profess,
Depart, thy hope is certainty,
The third, the better life on high
Shalt thou possess."

"O Death, no more, no more delay;
My spirit longs to flee away,
And be at rest;
The will of Heaven my will shall be,
I bow to the divine decree,
To God's behest.

"My soul is ready to depart,
No thought rebels, the obedient heart
Breathes forth no sigh;
The wish on earth to linger still
Were vain, when 't is God's sovereign will
That we shall die.

"O thou, that for our sins didst take
A human form, and humbly make
Thy home on earth;
Thou, that to thy divinity
A human nature didst ally
By mortal birth,

"And in that form didst suffer here
Torment, and agony, and fear,
So patiently;
By thy redeeming grace alone,
And not for merits of my own,
O, pardon me!"

As thus the dying warrior prayed,
Without one gathering mist or shade
Upon his mind;
Encircled by his family,
Watched by affection's gentle eye
So soft and kind;

His soul to Him, who gave it, rose;
God lead it to its long repose,
Its glorious rest!
And, though the warrior's sun has set,
Its light shall linger round us yet,
Bright, radiant, blest.




SONNETS

I

THE GOOD SHEPHERD

(EL BUEN PASTOR)

BY LOPE DE VEGA

Shepherd! who with thine amorous, sylvan song
  Hast broken the slumber that encompassed me,
  Who mad'st thy crook from the accursed tree,
  On which thy powerful arms were stretched so long!
Lead me to mercy's ever-flowing fountains;
  For thou my shepherd, guard, and guide shalt be;
  I will obey thy voice, and wait to see
  Thy feet all beautiful upon the mountains.
Hear, Shepherd! thou who for thy flock art dying,
  O, wash away these scarlet sins, for thou
  Rejoicest at the contrite sinner's vow.
O, wait! to thee my weary soul is crying,
  Wait for me!  Yet why ask it, when I see,
  With feet nailed to the cross, thou 'rt waiting still for me!


II

TO-MORROW

(MANANA)

BY LOPE DE VEGA

Lord, what am I, that with unceasing care,
  Thou didst seek after me, that thou didst wait
  Wet with unhealthy dews, before my gate,
  And pass the gloomy nights of winter there?
O strange delusion! that I did not greet
  Thy blest approach, and O, to Heaven how lost,
  If my ingratitude's unkindly frost
  Has chilled the bleeding wounds upon thy feet.
How oft my guardian angel gently cried,
  "Soul, from thy casement look, and thou shalt see
  How he persists to knock and wait for thee!"
And, O! how often to that voice of sorrow,
  "To-morrow we will open," I replied,
  And when the morrow came I answered still "To-morrow."


III

THE NATIVE LAND

(EL PATRIO CIELO)

 BY FRANCISCO DE ALDANA

Clear fount of light! my native land on high,
  Bright with a glory that shall never fade!
  Mansion of truth! without a veil or shade,
  Thy holy quiet meets the spirit's eye.
There dwells the soul in its ethereal essence,
  Gasping no longer for life's feeble breath;
  But, sentinelled in heaven, its glorious presence
  With pitying eye beholds, yet fears not, death.
Beloved country! banished from thy shore,
  A stranger in this prison-house of clay,
  The exiled spirit weeps and sighs for thee!
Heavenward the bright perfections I adore
  Direct, and the sure promise cheers the way,
  That, whither love aspires, there shall my dwelling be.


IV

THE IMAGE OF GOD

(LA IMAGEN DE DIOS)

BY FRANCISCO DE ALDANA

O Lord! who seest, from yon starry height,
  Centred in one the future and the past,
  Fashioned in thine own image, see how fast
  The world obscures in me what once was bright!
Eternal Sun! the warmth which thou hast given,
  To cheer life's flowery April, fast decays;
  Yet in the hoary winter of my days,
  Forever green shall be my trust in Heaven.
Celestial King! O let thy presence pass
  Before my spirit, and an image fair
  Shall meet that look of mercy from on high,
As the reflected image in a glass
  Doth meet the look of him who seeks it there,
  And owes its being to the gazer's eye.


V

THE BROOK

(A UN ARROYUELO)

ANONYMOUS

Laugh of the mountain!--lyre of bird and tree!
  Pomp of the meadow! mirror of the morn!
  The soul of April, unto whom are born
  The rose and jessamine, leaps wild in thee!
Although, where'er thy devious current strays,
  The lap of earth with gold and silver teems,
  To me thy clear proceeding brighter seems
  Than golden sands, that charm each shepherd's gaze.
How without guile thy bosom, all transparent
  As the pure crystal, lets the curious eye
  Thy secrets scan, thy smooth, round pebbles count!
How, without malice murmuring, glides thy current!
  O sweet simplicity of days gone by!
  Thou shun'st the haunts of man, to dwell in limpid fount!




ANCIENT SPANISH BALLADS.

In the chapter with this title in Outre-Mer, besides Illustrations
from Byron and Lockhart are the three following examples,
contributed by Mr. Longfellow.


I

Rio Verde, Rio Verde!
  Many a corpse is bathed in thee,
Both of Moors and eke of Christians,
  Slain with swords most cruelly.

And thy pure and crystal waters
  Dappled are with crimson gore;
For between the Moors and Christians
  Long has been the fight and sore.

Dukes and Counts fell bleeding near thee,
  Lords of high renown were slain,
Perished many a brave hidalgo
  Of the noblemen of Spain.


II

"King Alfonso the Eighth, having exhausted his treasury in war,
wishes to lay a tax of five farthings upon each of the Castillan
hidalgos, in order to defray the expenses of a journey from
Burgos to Cuenca.  This proposition of the king was met with
disdain by the noblemen who had been assembled on the occasion."


Don Nuno, Count of Lara,
  In anger and in pride,
Forgot all reverence for the king,
  And thus in wrath replied:

"Our noble ancestors," quoth he,
  "Ne'er such a tribute paid;
Nor shall the king receive of us
  What they have once gainsaid.

"The base-born soul who deems it just
  May here with thee remain;
But follow me, ye cavaliers,
  Ye noblemen of Spain."

Forth followed they the noble Count,
  They marched to Glera's plain;
Out of three thousand gallant knights
  Did only three remain.

They tied the tribute to their spears,
  They raised it in the air,
And they sent to tell their lord the king
  That his tax was ready there.

"He may send and take by force," said they,
  "This paltry sum of gold;
But the goodly gift of liberty
  Cannot be bought and sold."


III

"One of the finest of the historic ballads is that which describes
Bernardo's march to Roncesvalles.  He sallies forth 'with three
thousand Leonese and more,' to protect the glory and freedom of
his native land.  From all sides, the peasantry of the land flock
to the hero's standard."


The peasant leaves his plough afield,
  The reaper leaves his hook,
And from his hand the shepherd-boy.
  Lets fall the pastoral crook.

The young set up a shout of joy,
  The old forget their years,
The feeble man grows stout of heart.
  No more the craven fears.

All rush to Bernard's standard,
  And on liberty they call;
They cannot brook to wear the yoke,
 When threatened by the Gaul.

"Free were we born," 't is thus they cry
  "And willingly pay we
The duty that we owe our king
  By the divine decree.

"But God forbid that we obey
  The laws of foreign knaves,
Tarnish the glory of our sires,
  And make our children slaves.

"Our hearts have not so craven grown,
  So bloodless all our veins,
So vigorless our brawny arms,
  As to submit to chains.

"Has the audacious Frank, forsooth,
  Subdued these seas and lands?
Shall he a bloodless victory have?
No, not while we have hands.

"He shall learn that the gallant Leonese
  Can bravely fight and fall,
But that they know not how to yield;
  They are Castilians all.

"Was it for this the Roman power
  Of old was made to yield
Unto Numantia's valiant hosts
  On many a bloody field?

"Shall the bold lions that have bathed
  Their paws in Libyan gore,
Crouch basely to a feebler foe,
  And dare the strife no more?

"Let the false king sell town and tower,
  But not his vassals free;
For to subdue the free-born soul
  No royal power hath he!"



VIDA DE SAN MILLAN

BY GONZALO DE BERCEO

And when the kings were in the field,--their squadrons in array,--
With lance in rest they onward pressed to mingle in the fray;
But soon upon the Christians fell a terror of their foes,--
These were a numerous army,--a little handful those.

And while the Christian people stood in this uncertainty,
Upward to heaven they turned their eyes, and fixed their thoughts on high;
And there two figures they beheld, all beautiful and bright,
Even than the pure new-fallen snow their garments were more white.

They rode upon two horses more white than crystal sheen,
And arms they bore such as before no mortal man had seen;
The one, he held a crosier,--a pontiff's mitre wore;
The other held a crucifix,--such man ne'er saw before.

Their faces were angelical, celestial forms had they,--
And downward through the fields of air they urged their rapid way;
They looked upon the Moorish host with fierce and angry look,
And in their hands, with dire portent, their naked sabres shook.

The Christian host, beholding this, straightway take heart again;
They fall upon their bended knees, all resting on the plain,
And each one with his clenched fist to smite his breast begins,
And promises to God on high he will forsake his sins.

And when the heavenly knights drew near unto the battle-ground,
They dashed among the Moors and dealt unerring blows around;
Such deadly havoc there they made the foremost ranks along,
A panic terror spread unto the hindmost of the throng.

Together with these two good knights, the champions of the sky,
The Christians rallied and began to smite full sore and high;
The Moors raised up their voices and by the Koran swore
That in their lives such deadly fray they ne'er had seen before.

Down went the misbelievers,--fast sped the bloody fight,--
Some ghastly and dismembered lay, and some half dead with fright:
Full sorely they repented that to the field they came,
For they saw that from the battle they should retreat with shame.

Another thing befell them,--they dreamed not of such woes,--
The very arrows that the Moors shot front their twanging bows
Turned back against them in their flight and wounded them full sore,
And every blow they dealt the foe was paid in drops of gore.

                 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

Now he that bore the crosier, and the papal crown had on,
Was the glorified Apostle, the brother of Saint John;
And he that held the crucifix, and wore the monkish hood,
Was the holy San Millan of Cogolla's neighborhood.



SAN MIGUEL, THE CONVENT

(SAN MIGUEL DE LA TUMBA)

BY GONZALO DE BERCEO


San Miguel de la Tumba is a convent vast and wide;
The sea encircles it around, and groans on every side:
It is a wild and dangerous place, and many woes betide
The monks who in that burial-place in penitence abide.

Within those dark monastic walls, amid the ocean flood,
Of pious, fasting monks there dwelt a holy brotherhood;
To the Madonna's glory there an altar high was placed,
And a rich and costly image the sacred altar graced.

Exalted high upon a throne, the Virgin Mother smiled,
And, as the custom is, she held within her arms the Child;
The kings and wise men of the East were kneeling by her side;
Attended was she like a queen whom God had sanctified.

               .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

Descending low before her face a screen of feathers hung,--
A moscader, or fan for flies, 'tis called in vulgar tongue;
From the feathers of the peacock's wing 't was fashioned bright and fair,
And glistened like the heaven above when all its stars are there.

It chanced that, for the people's sins, fell the lightning's blasting stroke:
Forth from all four the sacred walls the flames consuming broke;
The sacred robes were all consumed, missal and holy book;
And hardly with their lives the monks their crumbling walls forsook.

               .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .


But though the desolating flame raged fearfully and wild,
It did not reach the Virgin Queen, it did not reach the Child;
It did not reach the feathery screen before her face that shone,
Nor injure in a farthing's worth the image or the throne.

The image it did not consume, it did not burn the screen;
Even in the value of a hair they were not hurt, I ween;
Not even the smoke did reach them, nor injure more the shrine
Than the bishop hight Don Tello has been hurt by hand of mine.

               .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .


SONG

She is a maid of artless grace,
Gentle in form, and fair of face,

Tell me, thou ancient mariner,
  That sailest on the sea,
If ship, or sail or evening star
  Be half so fair as she!

Tell me, thou gallant cavalier,
  Whose shining arms I see,
If steel, or sword, or battle-field
  Be half so fair as she!

Tell me, thou swain, that guard'st thy flock
  Beneath the shadowy tree,
If flock, or vale, or mountain-ridge
  Be half so fair as she!


SANTA TERESA'S BOOK-MARK

(LETRILLA QUE LLEVABA POR REGISTRO EN SU BREVIARIO)

BY SANTA TERESA DE AVILA

Let nothing disturb thee,
Nothing affright thee;
All things are passing;
God never changeth;
Patient endurance
Attaineth to all things;
Who God possesseth
In nothing is wanting;
Alone God sufficeth.



FROM THE CANCIONEROS

I

EYES SO TRISTFUL, EYES SO TRISTFUL

(OJOS TRISTES, OJOS TRISTES)

BY DIEGO DE SALDANA

Eyes so tristful, eyes so tristful,
Heart so full of care and cumber,
I was lapped in rest and slumber,
Ye have made me wakeful, wistful!

In this life of labor endless
Who shall comfort my distresses?
Querulous my soul and friendless
In its sorrow shuns caresses.
Ye have made me, ye have made me
Querulous of you, that care not,
Eyes so tristful, yet I dare not
Say to what ye have betrayed me.


II

SOME DAY, SOME DAY

(ALGUNA VEZ)

BY CRISTOBAL DE GASTILLOJO

Some day, some day
O troubled breast,
Shalt thou find rest.

If Love in thee
To grief give birth,
Six feet of earth
Can more than he;
There calm and free
And unoppressed
Shalt thou find rest.

The unattained
In life at last,
When life is passed,
Shall all be gained;
And no more pained,
No more distressed,
Shalt thou find rest.


III

COME, O DEATH, SO SILENT FLYING

(VEN, MUERTE TAN ESCONDIDA)

BY EL COMMENDADOR ESCRIVA

Come, O Death, so silent flying
That unheard thy coming be,
Lest the sweet delight of dying
Bring life back again to me.
For thy sure approach perceiving,
In my constancy and pain
I new life should win again,
Thinking that I am not living.
So to me, unconscious lying,
All unknown thy coming be,
Lest the sweet delight of dying
Bring life back again to me.
Unto him who finds thee hateful,
Death, thou art inhuman pain;
But to me, who dying gain,
Life is but a task ungrateful.
Come, then, with my wish complying,
All unheard thy coming be,
Lest the sweet delight of dying
Bring life back again to me.


IV

GLOVE OF BLACK IN WHITE HAND BARE

Glove of black in white hand bare,
And about her forehead pale
Wound a thin, transparent veil,
That doth not conceal her hair;
Sovereign attitude and air,
Cheek and neck alike displayed
With coquettish charms arrayed,
Laughing eyes and fugitive;--
This is killing men that live,
'T is not mourning for the dead.



FROM THE SWEDISH AND DANISH


PASSAGES FROM FRITHIOF'S SAGA

BY ESAIAS TEGNER

I

FRITHIOF'S HOMESTEAD

Three miles extended around the fields of the homestead, on three sides
Valleys and mountains and hills, but on the fourth side was the ocean.
Birch woods crowned the summits, but down the slope of the hillsides
Flourished the golden corn, and man-high was waving the rye-field.
Lakes, full many in number, their mirror held up for the mountains,
Held for the forests up, in whose depths the high-horned reindeers
Had their kingly walk, and drank of a hundred brooklets.
But in the valleys widely around, there fed on the greensward
Herds with shining hides and udders that longed for the milk-pail.
'Mid these scattered, now here and now there, were numberless flocks of
Sheep with fleeces white, as thou seest the white-looking stray clouds,
Flock-wise spread o'er the heavenly vault when it bloweth in springtime.
Coursers two times twelve, all mettlesome, fast fettered storm-winds,
Stamping stood in the line of stalls, and tugged at their fodder.
Knotted with red were their manes, and their hoofs all white with steel shoes.
Th' banquet-hall, a house by itself, was timbered of hard fir.
Not five hundred men (at ten times twelve to the hundred)
Filled up the roomy hall, when assembled for drinking, at Yule-tide.
Through the hall, as long as it was, went a table of holm-oak,
Polished and white, as of steel; the columns twain of the High-seat
Stood at the end thereof, two gods carved out of an elm-tree:
Odin with lordly look, and Frey with the sun on his frontlet.
Lately between the two, on a bear-skin (the skin it was coal-black,
Scarlet-red was the throat, but the paws were shodden with silver),
Thorsten sat with his friends, Hospitality sitting with Gladness.
Oft, when the moon through the cloudrack flew, related the old man
Wonders from distant lands he had seen, and cruises of Vikings
Far away on the Baltic, and Sea of the West and the White Sea.
Hushed sat the listening bench, and their glances hung on the graybeard's
Lips, as a bee on the rose; but the Scald was thinking of Brage,
Where, with his silver beard, and runes on his tongue, he is seated
Under the leafy beech, and tells a tradition by Mimer's
Ever-murmuring wave, himself a living tradition.
Midway the floor (with thatch was it strewn) burned ever the fire-flame
Glad on its stone-built hearth; and thorough the wide-mouthed smoke-flue
Looked the stars, those heavenly friends, down into the great hall.
Round the walls, upon nails of steel, were hanging in order
Breastplate and helmet together, and here and there among them
Downward lightened a sword, as in winter evening a star shoots.
More than helmets and swords the shields in the hall were resplendent,
White as the orb of the sun, or white as the moon's disk of silver.
Ever and anon went a maid round the hoard, and filled up the drink-horns,
Ever she cast down her eyes and blushed; in the shield her reflection
Blushed, too, even as she; this gladdened the drinking champions.


II

A SLEDGE-RIDE ON THE ICE

King Ring with his queen to the banquet did fare,
On the lake stood the ice so mirror-clear,

"Fare not o'er the ice," the stranger cries;
"It will burst, and full deep the cold bath lies."

"The king drowns not easily," Ring outspake;
"He who's afraid may go round the lake."

Threatening and dark looked the stranger round,
His steel shoes with haste on his feet he bound,

The sledge-horse starts forth strong and free;
He snorteth flames, so glad is he.

"Strike out," screamed the king, "my trotter good,
Let us see if thou art of Sleipner's blood."

They go as a storm goes over the lake.
No heed to his queen doth the old man take.

But the steel-shod champion standeth not still,
He passeth them by as swift as he will.

He carves many runes in the frozen tide,
Fair Ingeborg o'er her own name doth glide.


III

FRITHIOF'S TEMPTATION

Spring is coming, birds are twittering, forests leaf, and smiles the sun,
And the loosened torrents downward, singing, to the ocean run;
Glowing like the cheek of Freya, peeping rosebuds 'gin to ope,
And in human hearts awaken love of life, and joy, and hope.

Now will hunt the ancient monarch, and the queen shall join the sport:
Swarming in its gorgeous splendor, is assembled all the Court;
Bows ring loud, and quivers rattle, stallions paw the ground alway,
And, with hoods upon their eyelids, scream the falcons for their prey.

See, the Queen of the Chase advances!  Frithiof, gaze not at the sight!
Like a star upon a spring-cloud sits she on her palfrey white.
Half of Freya, half of Rota, yet more beauteous than these two,
And from her light hat of purple wave aloft the feathers blue.

Gaze not at her eyes' blue heaven, gaze not at her golden hair!
Oh beware! her waist is slender, full her bosom is, beware!
Look not at the rose and lily on her cheek that shifting play,
List not to the voice beloved, whispering like the wind of May.

Now the huntsman's band is ready.  Hurrah! over hill and dale!
Horns ring, and the hawks right upward to the hall of Odin sail.
All the dwellers in the forest seek in fear their cavern homes,
But, with spear outstretched before her, after them the Valkyr comes.

                 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

Then threw Frithiof down his mantle, and upon the greensward spread,
And the ancient king so trustful laid on Frithiof's knee his head,
Slept as calmly as the hero sleepeth, after war's alarm,
On his shield, or as an infant sleeps upon its mother's arm.

As he slumbers, hark! there sings a coal-black bird upon the bough;
"Hasten, Frithiof, slay the old man, end your quarrel at a blow:
Take his queen, for she is thine, and once the bridal kiss she gave,
Now no human eye beholds thee, deep and silent is the grave,"

Frithiof listens; hark! there sings a snow-white bird upon the bough:
"Though no human eye beholds thee, Odin's eye beholds thee now.
Coward! wilt thou murder sleep, and a defenceless old man slay!
Whatsoe'er thou winn'st, thou canst not win a hero's fame this way."

Thus the two wood-birds did warble: Frithiof took his war-sword good,
With a shudder hurled it from him, far into the gloomy wood.
Coal-black bird flies down to Nastrand, but on light, unfolded wings,
Like the tone of harps, the other, sounding towards the sun, upsprings.

Straight the ancient king awakens.  "Sweet has been my sleep," he said;
"Pleasantly sleeps one in the shadow, guarded by a brave man's blade.
But where is thy sword, O stranger?  Lightning's brother, where is he?
Who thus parts you, who should never from each other parted be?"

"It avails not," Frithiof answered; "in the North are other swords:
Sharp, O monarch! is the sword's tongue, and it speaks not peaceful words;
Murky spirits dwell in steel blades, spirits from the Niffelhem;
Slumber is not safe before them, silver locks but anger them."


IV

FRITHIOF'S FAREWELL

No more shall I see
In its upward motion
The smoke of the Northland.  Man is a slave:
The fates decree.
On the waste of the ocean
There is my fatherland, there is my grave.

Go not to the strand,
Ring, with thy bride,
After the stars spread their light through the sky.
Perhaps in the sand,
Washed up by the tide,
The bones of the outlawed Viking may lie.

Then, quoth the king,
"'T is mournful to hear
A man like a whimpering maiden cry.
The death-song they sing
Even now in mine ear,
What avails it?  He who is born must die."


*****


THE CHILDREN OF THE LORD'S SUPPER

BY ESAIAS TEGNER

Pentecost, day of rejoicing, had come. The church of the village
Gleaming stood in the morning's sheen.
   On the spire of the bell
Decked with a brazen cock, the friendly flames of the Spring-sun
Glanced like the tongues of fire, beheld by Apostles aforetime.
Clear was the heaven and blue, and May, with her cap crowned with roses,
Stood in her holiday dress in the fields, and the wind and the brooklet
Murmured gladness and peace, God's-peace! with lips rosy-tinted
Whispered the race of the flowers, and merry on balancing branches
Birds were singing their carol, a jubilant hymn to the Highest.
Swept and clean was the churchyard. Adorned like a leaf-woven arbor
Stood its old-fashioned gate; and within upon each cross of iron
Hung was a fragrant garland, new twined by the hands of affection.
Even the dial, that stood on a mound among the departed,
(There full a hundred years had it stood,) was embellished with blossoms
Like to the patriarch hoary, the sage of his kith and the hamlet,
Who on his birthday is crowned by children and children's children,
So stood the ancient prophet, and mute with his pencil of iron
Marked on the tablet of stone, and measured the time and its changes,
While all around at his feet, an eternity slumbered in quiet.
Also the church within was adorned, for this was the season
When the young, their parents' hope, and the loved-ones of heaven,
Should at the foot of the altar renew the vows of their baptism.
Therefore each nook and corner was swept and cleaned, and the dust was
Blown from the walls and ceiling, and from the oil-painted benches.
There stood the church like a garden; the Feast of the Leafy Pavilions
Saw we in living presentment. From noble arms on the church wall
Grew forth a cluster of leaves, and the preacher's pulpit of oak-wood
Budded once more anew, as aforetime the rod before Aaron.
Wreathed thereon was the Bible with leaves, and the dove, washed with silver
Under its canopy fastened, had on it a necklace of wind-flowers.
But in front of the choir, round the altar-piece painted by Horberg,
Crept a garland gigantic; and bright-curling tresses of angels
Peeped, like the sun from a cloud, from out of the shadowy leaf-work.
Likewise the lustre of brass, new-polished, blinked from the ceiling,
And for lights there were lilies of Pentecost set in the sockets.

   Loud rang the bells already; the thronging crowd was assembled
Far from valleys and hills, to list to the holy preaching.
Hark! then roll forth at once the mighty tones of the organ,
Hover like voices from God, aloft like invisible spirits.
Like as Elias in heaven, when he cast from off him his mantle,
So cast off the soul its garments of earth; and with one voice
Chimed in the congregation, and sang an anthem immortal
Of the sublime Wallin, of David's harp in the North-land
Tuned to the choral of Luther; the song on its mighty pinions
Took every living soul, and lifted it gently to heaven,
And each face did shine like the Holy One's face upon Tabor.
Lo! there entered then into the church the Reverend Teacher.
Father he hight and he was in the parish; a Christianly plainness
Clothed from his head to his feet the old man of seventy winters.
Friendly was he to behold, and glad as the heralding angel
Walked he among the crowds, but still a contemplative grandeur
Lay on his forehead as clear as on moss-covered gravestone a sunbeam.
As in his inspiration (an evening twilight that faintly
Gleams in the human soul, even now, from the day of creation)
Th' Artist, the friend of heaven, imagines Saint John when in Patmos,
Gray, with his eyes uplifted to heaven, so seemed then the old man:
Such was the glance of his eye, and such were his tresses of silver.
All the congregation arose in the pews that were numbered.
But with a cordial look, to the right and the left hand, the old man
Nodding all hail and peace, disappeared in the innermost chancel.

   Simply and solemnly now proceeded the Christian service,
Singing and prayer, and at last an ardent discourse from the old man.
Many a moving word and warning, that out of the heart came,
Fell like the dew of the morning, like manna on those in the desert.
Then, when all was finished, the Teacher re-entered the chancel
Followed therein by the young. The boys on the right had their places,
Delicate figures, with close-curling hair and cheeks rosy-blooming.
But on the left of these there stood the tremulous lilies,
Tinged with the blushing light of the dawn, the diffident maidens,--
Folding their hands in prayer, and their eyes cast down on the pavement
Now came, with question and answer, the catechism. In the beginning
Answered the children with troubled and faltering voice, but the old man's
Glances of kindness encouraged them soon, and the doctrines eternal
Flowed, like the waters of fountains, so clear from lips unpolluted.
Each time the answer was closed, and as oft as they named the Redeemer,
Lowly louted the boys, and lowly the maidens all courtesied.
Friendly the Teacher stood, like an angel of light there among them.
And to the children explained the holy, the highest, in few words,
Thorough, yet simple and clear, for sublimity always is simple,
Both in sermon and song, a child can seize on its meaning.
E'en as the green-growing bud unfolds when Springtide approaches.
Leaf by leaf puts forth, and warmed, by the radiant sunshine,
Blushes with purple and gold, till at last the perfected blossom
Opens its odorous chalice, and rocks with its crown in the breezes,
So was unfolded here the Christian lore of salvation,
Line by line from the soul of childhood. The fathers and mothers
Stood behind them in tears, and were glad at the well-worded answer.

   Now went the old man up to the altar;--and straightway transfigured
(So did it seem unto me) was then the affectionate Teacher.
Like the Lord's Prophet sublime, and awful as Death and as Judgment
Stood he, the God-commissioned, the soul-searcher, earthward descending
Glances, sharp as a sword, into hearts that to him were transparent
Shot he; his voice was deep, was low like the thunder afar off.
So on a sudden transfigured he stood there, lie spake and he questioned.

   "This is the faith of the Fathers, the faith the Apostles delivered,
This is moreover the faith whereunto I baptized you, while still ye
Lay on your mothers' breasts, and nearer the portals of heaven,
Slumbering received you then the Holy Church in its bosom;
Wakened from sleep are ye now, and the light in its radiant splendor
Downward rains from the heaven;--to-day on the threshold of childhood
Kindly she frees you again, to examine and make your election,
For she knows naught of compulsion, and only conviction desireth.
This is the hour of your trial, the turning-point of existence,
Seed for the coming days; without revocation departeth
Now from your lips the confession; Bethink ye, before ye make answer!
Think not, O think not with guile to deceive the questioning Teacher.
Sharp is his eye to-day, and a curse ever rests upon falsehood.
Enter not with a lie on Life's journey; the multitude hears you,
Brothers and sisters and parents, what dear upon earth is and holy
Standeth before your sight as a witness; the Judge everlasting
Looks from the sun down upon you, and angels in waiting beside him
Grave your confession in letters of fire upon tablets eternal.
Thus, then,--believe ye in God, in the Father who this world created?
Him who redeemed it, the Son, and the Spirit where both are united?
Will ye promise me here, (a holy promise!) to cherish
God more than all things earthly, and every man as a brother?
Will ye promise me here, to confirm your faith by your living,
Th' heavenly faith of affection! to hope, to forgive, and to suffer,
Be what it may your condition, and walk before God in uprightness?
Will ye promise me this before God and man?"--With a clear voice
Answered the young men Yes! and Yes! with lips softly-breathing
Answered the maidens eke. Then dissolved from the brow of the Teacher
Clouds with the lightnings therein, and lie spake in accents more gentle,
Soft as the evening's breath, as harps by Babylon's rivers.

   "Hail, then, hail to you all! To the heirdom of heaven be ye welcome!
Children no more from this day, but by covenant brothers and sisters!
Yet,--for what reason not children? Of such is the kingdom of heaven.
Here upon earth an assemblage of children, in heaven one Father,
Ruling them all as his household,--forgiving in turn and chastising,
That is of human life a picture, as Scripture has taught us.
Blest are the pure before God! Upon purity and upon virtue
Resteth the Christian Faith: she herself from on high is descended.
Strong as a man and pure as a child, is the sum of the doctrine,
Which the Divine One taught, and suffered and died on the cross for
Oh, as ye wander this day from childhood's sacred asylum
Downward and ever downward, and deeper in Age's chill valley,
Oh, how soon will ye come,--too soon!--and long to turn backward
Up to its hill-tops again, to the sun-illumined, where Judgment
Stood like a father before you, and Pardon, clad like a mother,
Gave you her hand to kiss, and the loving heart was for given
Life was a play and your hands grasped after the roses of heaven!
Seventy years have I lived already; the Father eternal
Gave rue gladness and care; but the loveliest hours of existence,
When I have steadfastly gazed in their eyes, I have instantly known them,
Known them all again;--the were my childhood's acquaintance.
Therefore take from henceforth, as guides in the paths of existence,
Prayer, with her eyes raised to heaven, and Innocence, bride of man's childhood
Innocence, child beloved, is a guest from the world of the blessed,
Beautiful, and in her hand a lily; on life's roaring billows
Swings she in safety, she heedeth them not in the ship she is sleeping.
Calmly she gazes around in the turmoil of men; in the desert
Angels descend and minister unto her; she herself knoweth
Naught of her glorious attendance; but follows faithful and humble,
Follows so long as she may her friend; oh do not reject her,
For she cometh from God and she holdeth the keys of the heavens.
Prayer is Innocence' friend; and willingly flieth incessant
'Twixt the earth and the sky, the carrier-pigeon of heaven,
Son of Eternity, fettered in Time, and an exile, the Spirit
Tugs at his chains evermore, and struggles like flame ever upward.
Still he recalls with emotion his Father's manifold mansions,
Thinks of the land of his fathers, where blossomed more freshly the flowerets,
Shone a more beautiful sun, and he played with the winged angels.
Then grows the earth too narrow, too close; and homesick for heaven
Longs the wanderer again; and the Spirit's longings are worship;
Worship is called his most beautiful hour, and its tongue is entreaty.
Aid when the infinite burden of life descendeth upon us,
Crushes to earth our hope, and, under the earth, in the graveyard,
Then it is good to pray unto God; for his sorrowiug children
Turns he ne'er from his door, but he heals and helps and consoles them,
Yet is it better to pray when all things are prosperous with us,
Pray in fortunate days, for life's most beautiful Fortune
Kneels before the Eternal's throne; and with hands interfolded,
Praises thankful and moved the only giver of blessings.
Or do ye know, ye children, one blessing that comes not from Heaven?
What has mankind forsooth, the poor! that it has not received?
Therefore, fall in the dust and pray! The seraphs adoring
Cover with pinions six their face in the glory of him who
Hung his masonry pendent on naught, when the world be created.
Earth declareth his might, and the firmament utters his glory.
Races blossom and die, and stars fall downward from heaven,
Downward like withered leaves; at the last stroke of midnight, millenniums
Lay themselves down at his feet, and he sees them, but counts them as nothing
Who shall stand in his presence? The wrath of the judge is terrific,
Casting the insolent down at a glance. When he speaks in his anger
Hillocks skip like the kid, and mountains leap like the roebuck.
Yet,--why are ye afraid, ye children? This awful avenger,
Ah! is a merciful God! God's voice was not in the earthquake,
Not in the fire, nor the storm, but it was in the whispering breezes.
Love is the root of creation; God's essence; worlds without number
Lie in his bosom like children; he made them for this purpose only.
Only to love and to be loved again, he breathed forth his spirit
Into the slumbering dust, and upright standing, it laid its
Hand on its heart, and felt it was warm with a flame out of heaven.
Quench, oh quench not that flame! It is the breath of your being.
Love is life, but hatred is death. Not father, nor mother
Loved you, as God has loved you; for 't was that you may be happy
Gave he his only Son. When he bowed down his head in the death-hour
Solemnized Love its triumph; the sacrifice then was completed.
Lo! then was rent on a sudden the veil of the temple, dividing
Earth and heaven apart, and the dead from their sepulchres rising
Whispered with pallid lips and low in the ears of each other
Th' answer, but dreamed of before, to creation's enigma,--Atonement!
Depths of Love are Atonement's depths, for Love is Atonement.
Therefore, child of mortality, love thou the merciful Father;
Wish what the Holy One wishes, and not from fear, but affection
Fear is the virtue of slaves; but the heart that loveth is willing
Perfect was before God, and perfect is Love, and Love only.
Lovest thou God as thou oughtest, then lovest thou likewise thy brethren:
One is the sun in heaven, and one, only one, is Love also.
Bears not each human figure the godlike stamp on his forehead
Readest thou not in his face thou origin? Is he not sailing
Lost like thyself on an ocean unknown, and is he not guided
By the same stars that guide thee? Why shouldst thou hate then thy brother?
Hateth he thee, forgive! For 't is sweet to stammer one letter
Of the Eternal's language;--on earth it is called Forgiveness!
Knowest thou Him, who forgave, with the crown of thorns on his temples?
Earnestly prayed for his foes, for his murderers? Say, dost thou know him?
Ah! thou confessest his name, so follow likewise his example,
Think of thy brother no ill, but throw a veil over his failings,
Guide the erring aright; for the good, the heavenly shepherd
Took the lost lamb in his arms, and bore it back to its mother.
This is the fruit of Love, and it is by its fruits that we know it.
Love is the creature's welfare, with God; but Love among mortals
Is but an endless sigh! He longs, and endures, and stands waiting,
Suffers and yet rejoices, and smiles with tears on his eyelids.
Hope,--so is called upon earth, his recompense, Hope, the befriending,
Does what she can, for she points evermore up to heaven, and faithful
Plunges her anchor's peak in the depths of the grave, and beneath it
Paints a more beautiful world, a dim, but a sweet play of shadows!
Races, better than we, have leaned on her wavering promise,
Having naught else but Hope. Then praise we our Father in heaven,
Him, who has given us more; for to us has Hope been transfigured,
Groping no longer in night; she is Faith, she is living assurance.
Faith is enlightened Hope; she is light, is the eye of affection,
Dreams of the longing interprets, and carves their visions in marble.
Faith is the sun of life; and her countenance shines like the Hebrew's,
For she has looked upon God; the heaven on its stable foundation
Draws she with chains down to earth, and the New Jerusalem sinketh
Splendid with portals twelve in golden vapors descending.
There enraptured she wanders. and looks at the figures majestic,
Fears not the winged crowd, in the midst of them all is her homestead.
Therefore love and believe; for works will follow spontaneous
Even as day does the sun; the Right from the Good is an offspring,
Love in a bodily shape; and Christian works are no more than
Animate Love and faith, as flowers are the animate Springtide.
Works do follow us all unto God; there stand and bear witness
Not what they seemed,--but what they were only. Blessed is he who
Hears their confession secure; they are mute upon earth until death's hand
Opens the mouth of the silent. Ye children, does Death e'er alarm you?
Death is the brother of Love, twin-brother is he, and is only
More austere to behold. With a kiss upon lips that are fading
Takes he the soul and departs, and, rocked in the arms of affection,
Places the ransomed child, new born, 'fore the face of its father.
Sounds of his coming already I hear,--see dimly his pinions,
Swart as the night, but with stars strewn upon them! I fear not before him.
Death is only release, and in mercy is mute. On his bosom
Freer breathes, in its coolness, my breast; and face to face standing
Look I on God as he is, a sun unpolluted by vapors;
Look on the light of the ages I loved, the spirits majestic,
Nobler, better than I; they stand by the throne all transfigured,
Vested in white, and with harps of gold, and are singing an anthem,
Writ in the climate of heaven, in the language spoken by angels.
You, in like manner, ye children beloved, he one day shall gather,
Never forgets he the weary;--then welcome, ye loved ones, hereafter!
Meanwhile forget not the keeping of vows, forget not the promise,
Wander from holiness onward to holiness; earth shall ye heed not
Earth is but dust and heaven is light; I have pledged you to heaven.
God of the universe, hear me! thou fountain of Love everlasting,
Hark to the voice of thy servant! I send up my prayer to thy heaven!
Let me hereafter not miss at thy throne one spirit of all these,
Whom thou hast given me here! I have loved them all like a father.
May they bear witness for me, that I taught them the way of salvation,
Faithful, so far as I knew, of thy word; again may they know me,
Fall on their Teacher's breast, and before thy face may I place them,
Pure as they now are, but only more tried, and exclaiming with gladness,
Father, lo! I am here, and the children, whom thou hast given me!"

   Weeping he spake in these words; and now at the beck of the old man
Knee against knee they knitted a wreath round the altar's enclosure.
Kneeling he read then the prayers of the consecration, and softly
With him the children read; at the close, with tremulous accents,
Asked he the peace of Heaven, a benediction upon them.
Now should have ended his task for the day; the following Sunday
Was for the young appointed to eat of the Lord's holy Supper.
Sudden, as struck from the clouds, stood the Teacher silent and laid his
Hand on his forehead, and cast his looks upward; while thoughts high and holy,
Flew through the midst of his soul, and his eyes glanced with wonderful brightness.
"On the next Sunday, who knows! perhaps I shall rest in the graveyard!
Some one perhaps of yourselves, a lily broken untimely,
Bow down his head to the earth; why delay I? the hour is accomplished,
Warm is the heart;--I will! for to-day grows the harvest of heaven.
What I began accomplish I now; what failing therein is
I, the old man, will answer to God and the reverend father.
Say to me only, ye children, ye denizens new-come in heaven,
Are ye ready this day to eat of the bread of Atonement?
What it denoteth, that know ye full well, I have told it you often.
Of the new covenant symbol it is, of Atonement a token,
Stablished between earth and heaven. Man by his sins and transgressions
Far has wandered from God, from his essence. 'T was in the beginning
Fast by the Tree of Knowledge he fell, and it hangs its crown o'er the
Fall to this day; in the Thought is the Fall; in the Heart the Atonement.
Infinite is the fall,--the Atonement infinite likewise.
See! behind me, as far as the old man remembers, and forward,
Far as Hope in her flight can reach with her wearied pinions,
Sin and Atonement incessant go through the lifetime of mortals.
Sin is brought forth full-grown; but Atonement sleeps in our bosoms
Still as the cradled babe; and dreams of heaven and of angels,
Cannot awake to sensation; is like the tones in the harp's strings,
Spirits imprisoned, that wait evermore the deliverer's finger.
Therefore, ye children beloved, descended the Prince of Atonement,
Woke the slumberer from sleep, and she stands now with eyes all resplendent.
Bright as the vault of the sky, and battles with Sin and o'ercomes her.
Downward to earth he came and, transfigured, thence reascended,
Not from the heart in like wise, for there he still lives in the Spirit,
Loves and atones evermore. So long as Time is, is Atonement.
Therefore with reverence take this day her visible token.
Tokens are dead if the things live not. The light everlasting
Unto the blind is not, but is born of the eye that has vision.
Neither in bread nor in wine, but in the heart that is hallowed
Lieth forgiveness enshrined; the intention alone of amendment
Fruits of the earth ennobles to heavenly things, and removes all
Sin and the guerdon of sin. Only Love with his arms wide extended,
Penitence wee ping and praying; the Will that is tried, and whose gold flows
Purified forth from the flames; in a word, mankind by Atonement
Breaketh Atonement's bread, and drinketh Atonement's wine-cup.
But he who cometh up hither, unworthy, with hate in his bosom,
Scoffing at men and at God, is guilty of Christ's blessed body,
And the Redeemer's blood! To himself he eateth and drinketh
Death and doom! And from this, preserve us, thou heavenly Father!
Are ye ready, ye children, to eat of the bread of Atonement?"
Thus with emotion he asked, and together answered the children,
"Yes!" with deep sobs interrupted. Then read he the due supplications,
Read the Form of Communion, and in chimed the organ and anthem:
"O Holy Lamb of God, who takest away our transgressions,
Hear us! give us thy peace! have mercy, have mercy upon us!"
Th' old man, with trembling hand, and heavenly pearls on his eyelids,
Filled now the chalice and paten, and dealt round the mystical symbols.
Oh, then seemed it to me as if God, with the broad eye of midday,
Clearer looked in at the windows, and all the trees in the church yard
Bowed down their summits of green, and the grass on the graves 'gan to shiver
But in the children (I noted it well; I knew it) there ran a
Tremor of holy rapture along through their ice-cold members.
Decked like an altar before them, there stood the green earth, and above it
Heaven opened itself, as of old before Stephen; they saw there
Radiant in glory the Father, and on his right hand the Redeemer.
Under them hear they the clang of harpstrings, and angels from gold clouds
Beckon to them like brothers, and fan with their pinions of purple.

  Closed was the Teacher's task, and with heaven in their hearts and their faces,
Up rose the children all, and each bowed him, weeping full sorely,
Downward to kiss that reverend hand, but all of them pressed he
Moved to his bosom, and laid, with a prayer, his hands full of blessings,
Now on the holy breast, and now on the innocent tresses.


*******


KING CHRISTIAN

A NATIONAL SONG OF DENMARK

King Christian stood by the lofty mast
   In mist and smoke;
His sword was hammering so fast,
Through Gothic helm and brain it passed;
Then sank each hostile hulk and mast,
   In mist and smoke.
"Fly!" shouted they, "fly, he who can!
Who braves of Denmark's Christian
   The stroke?"

Nils Juel gave heed to the tempest's roar,
   Now is the hour!
He hoisted his blood-red flag once more,
And smote upon the foe full sore,
And shouted Loud, through the tempest's roar,
   "Now is the hour!"
"Fly!" shouted they, "for shelter fly!
Of Denmark's Juel who can defy
   The power?"

North Sea! a glimpse of Wessel rent
   Thy murky sky!
Then champions to thine arms were sent;
Terror and Death glared where he went;
From the waves was heard a wail, that
    rent
   Thy murky sky!
From Denmark, thunders Tordenskiol',
Let each to Heaven commend his soul,
    And fly!

Path of the Dane to fame and might!
   Dark-rolling wave!
Receive thy friend, who, scorning flight
Goes to meet danger with despite,
Proudly as thou the tempest's might
   Dark-rolling wave!
And amid pleasures and alarm;
And war and victory, be thine arms
   My grave!



THE ELECTED KNIGHT

Sir Oluf he rideth over the plain,
  Full seven miles broad and seven miles wide,
But never, ah never can meet with the man
 A tilt with him dare ride.

He saw under the hillside
 A Knight full well equipped;
His steed was black, his helm was barred;
  He was riding at full speed.

He wore upon his spurs
  Twelve little golden birds;
Anon he spurred his steed with a clang,
  And there sat all the birds and sang.

He wore upon his mail
  Twelve little golden wheels;
Anon in eddies the wild wind blew,
  And round and round the wheels they flew.

He wore before his breast
  A lance that was poised in rest;
And it was sharper than diamond-stone,
  It made Sir Oluf's heart to groan.

He wore upon his helm
  A wreath of ruddy gold;
And that gave him the Maidens Three,
  The youngest was fair to behold.

Sir Oluf questioned the Knight eftsoon
 If he were come from heaven down;
"Art thou Christ of Heaven," quoth he,
 "So will I yield me unto thee."

"I am not Christ the Great,
 Thou shalt not yield thee yet;
I am an Unknown Knight,
  Three modest Maidens have me bedight."

"Art thou a Knight elected,
  And have three Maidens thee bedight
So shalt thou ride a tilt this day,
  For all the Maidens' honor!"

The first tilt they together rode
  They put their steeds to the test,
The second tilt they together rode,
  They proved their manhood best.

The third tilt they together rode,
  Neither of them would yield;
The fourth tilt they together rode,
  They both fell on the field.

Now lie the lords upon the plain,
  And their blood runs unto death;
Now sit the Maidens in the high tower,
  The youngest sorrows till death.



CHILDHOOD

BY JENS IMMANUEL BAGGESEN

There was a time when I was very small,
  When my whole frame was but an ell in height;
Sweetly, as I recall it, tears do fall,
  And therefore I recall it with delight.

I sported in my tender mother's arms,
  And rode a-horseback on best father's knee;
Alike were sorrows, passions and alarms,
  And gold, and Greek, and love, unknown to me,

Then seemed to me this world far less in size,
  Likewise it seemed to me less wicked far;
Like points in heaven, I saw the stars arise,
  And longed for wings that I might catch a star.

I saw the moon behind the island fade,
  And thought, "Oh, were I on that island there,
I could find out of what the moon is made,
  Find out how large it is, how round, how fair!"

Wondering, I saw God's sun, through western skies,
  Sink in the ocean's golden lap at night,
And yet upon the morrow early rise,
  And paint the eastern heaven with crimson light;

And thought of God, the gracious Heavenly Father,
  Who made me, and that lovely sun on high,
And all those pearls of heaven thick-strung together,
  Dropped, clustering, from his hand o'er all the sky.

With childish reverence, my young lips did say
  The prayer my pious mother taught to me:
"O gentle God! oh, let me strive alway
  Still to be wise, and good, and follow Thee!"

So prayed I for my father and my mother,
  And for my sister, and for all the town;
The king I knew not, and the beggar-brother,
  Who, bent with age, went, sighing, up and down.

They perished, the blithe days of boyhood perished,
  And all the gladness, all the peace I knew!
Now have I but their memory, fondly cherished;--
  God! may I never lose that too!




FROM THE GERMAN

THE HAPPIEST LAND

There sat one day in quiet,
  By an alehouse on the Rhine,
Four hale and hearty fellows,
  And drank the precious wine.

The landlord's daughter filled their cups,
  Around the rustic board
Then sat they all so calm and still,
  And spake not one rude word.

But, when the maid departed,
  A Swabian raised his hand,
And cried, all hot and flushed with wine,
  "Long live the Swabian land!

"The greatest kingdom upon earth
  Cannot with that compare
With all the stout and hardy men
  And the nut-brown maidens there.

"Ha!" cried a Saxon, laughing,
  And dashed his heard with wine;
"I had rather live in Laplaud,
  Than that Swabian land of thine!

"The goodliest land on all this earth,
  It is the Saxon land
There have I as many maidens
  As fingers on this hand!"

"Hold your tongues! both Swabian
     and Saxon!"
  A bold Bohemian cries;
"If there's a heaven upon this earth,
  In Bohemia it lies.

"There the tailor blows the flute,
  And the cobbler blows the horn,
And the miner blows the bugle,
  Over mountain gorge and bourn."
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
And then the landlord's daughter
 Up to heaven raised her hand,
And said, "Ye may no more contend,--
 There lies the happiest land!"



THE WAVE

BY CHRISTOPH AUGUST TIEDGE

  "Whither, thou turbid wave?
Whither, with so much haste,
As if a thief wert thou?"

  "I am the Wave of Life,
Stained with my margin's dust;
From the struggle and the strife
Of the narrow stream I fly
To the Sea's immensity,
To wash from me the slime
Of the muddy banks of Time."



THE DEAD

BY ERNST STOCKMANN

   How they so softly rest,
   All they the holy ones,
   Unto whose dwelling-place
   Now doth my soul draw near!
   How they so softly rest,
   All in their silent graves,
   Deep to corruption
   Slowly don-sinking!

   And they no longer weep,
   Here, where complaint is still!
   And they no longer feel,
   Here, where all gladness flies!
   And, by the cypresses
   Softly o'ershadowed
   Until the Angel
   Calls them, they slumber!



THE BIRD AND THE SHIP

BY WILHELM MULLER

 "The rivers rush into the sea,
 By castle and town they go;
The winds behind them merrily
 Their noisy trumpets blow.

 "The clouds are passing far and high,
 We little birds in them play;
And everything, that can sing and fly,
 Goes with us, and far away.

 "I greet thee, bonny boat! Whither,
    or whence,
 With thy fluttering golden band?"--
 "I greet thee, little bird! To the wide sea
 I haste from the narrow land.

 "Full and swollen is every sail;
 I see no longer a hill,
I have trusted all to the sounding gale,
 And it will not let me stand still.

 "And wilt thou, little bird, go with us?
 Thou mayest stand on the mainmast tall,
For full to sinking is my house
 With merry companions all."--

 "I need not and seek not company,
 Bonny boat, I can sing all alone;
For the mainmast tall too heavy am I,
 Bonny boat, I have wings of my own.

"High over the sails, high over the mast,
 Who shall gainsay these joys?
When thy merry companions are still, at last,
 Thou shalt hear the sound of my voice.

 "Who neither may rest, nor listen may,
  God bless them every one!
I dart away, in the bright blue day,
 And the golden fields of the sun.

"Thus do I sing my merry song,
 Wherever the four winds blow;
And this same song, my whole life long,
 Neither Poet nor Printer may know.'



WHITHER?

BY WILHELM MULLER

  I heard a brooklet gushing
   From its rocky fountain near,
Down into the valley rushing,
   So fresh and wondrous clear.

  I  know not what came o'er me,
   Nor who the counsel gave;
  But I must hasten downward,
   All with my pilgrim-stave;

Downward, and ever farther,
   And ever the brook beside;
And ever fresher murmured,
 And ever clearer, the tide.

Is this the way I was going?
 Whither, O brooklet, say I
Thou hast, with thy soft murmur,
 Murmured my senses away.

What do I say of a murmur?
 That can no murmur be;
'T is the water-nymphs, that are singing
 Their roundelays under me.

Let them sing, my friend, let them murmur,
  And wander merrily near;
The wheels of a mill are going
 In every brooklet clear.



BEWARE!

(HUT DU DICH!)

I know a maiden fair to see,
   Take care!
She  can both false and friendly be,
   Beware! Beware!
   Trust her not,
She is fooling thee!

She  has two eyes, so soft and brown,
   Take care!
She  gives a side-glance and looks down,
   Beware! Beware!
   Trust her not,
She is fooling thee!

And she has hair of a golden hue,
   Take care!
And  what she says, it is not true,
   Beware! Beware!
   Trust her not,
She is fooling thee!

She  has a bosom as white as snow,
   Take care!
She knows how much it is best to show,
   Beware! Beware!
   Trust her not,
She is fooling thee!

She  gives thee a garland woven fair,
   Take care!
It is a fool's-cap for thee to wear,
   Beware! Beware!
   Trust her not,
She is fooling thee!



SONG OF THE BELL

Bell! thou soundest merrily,
When the bridal party
  To the church doth hie!
Bell! thou soundest solemnly.
When, on Sabbath morning,
  Fields deserted lie!

Bell! thou soundest merrily;
Tellest thou at evening,
  Bed-time draweth nigh!
Bell! thou soundest mournfully.
Tellest thou the bitter
  Parting hath gone by!

Say! how canst thou mourn?
How canst thou rejoice?
  Thou art but metal dull!
And yet all our sorrowings,
And all our rejoicings,
  Thou dost feel them all!

God hath wonders many,
Which we cannot fathom,
  Placed within thy form!
When the heart is sinking,
Thou alone canst raise it,
  Trembling in the storm!



THE CASTLE BY THE SEA

BY JOHANN LUDWIG UHLAND

 "Hast thou seen that lordly castle,
  That Castle by the Sea?
Golden and red above it
  The clouds float gorgeously.

 "And fain it would stoop downward
  To the mirrored wave below;
And fain it would soar upward
  In the evening's crimson glow."

 "Well have I seen that castle,
  That Castle by the Sea,
And the moon above it standing,
 And the mist rise solemnly."

 "The winds and the waves of ocean,
  Had they a merry chime?
Didst thou hear, from those lofty chambers,
 The harp and the minstrel's rhyme?"

 "The winds and the waves of ocean,
  They rested quietly,
But I heard on the gale a sound of wail,
  And tears came to mine eye."

 "And sawest thou on the turrets
  The King and his royal bride?
And the wave of their crimson mantles?
  And the golden crown of pride?

 "Led they not forth, in rapture,
  A beauteous maiden there?
Resplendent as the morning sun,
  Beaming with golden hair?"

 "Well saw I the ancient parents,
  Without the crown of pride;
They were moving slow, in weeds of woe,
  No maiden was by their side!"



THE BLACK KNIGHT

BY JOHANN LUDWIG UHLAND

'T was Pentecost, the Feast of Gladness,
When woods and fields put off all sadness.
  Thus began the King and spake:
 "So from the halls
Of ancient hofburg's walls,
  A luxuriant Spring shall break."

Drums and trumpets echo loudly,
Wave the crimson banners proudly,
  From balcony the King looked on;
In the play of spears,
Fell all the cavaliers,
 Before the monarch's stalwart son.

To the barrier of the fight
Rode at last a sable Knight.
 "Sir Knight! your name and scutcheon, say!"
"Should I speak it here,
Ye would stand aghast with fear;
  I am a Prince of mighty sway!"

When he rode into the lists,
The arch of heaven grew black with mists,
  And the castle 'gan to rock;
At the first blow,
Fell the youth from saddle-bow,
  Hardly rises from the shock.

Pipe and viol call the dances,
Torch-light through the high halls glances;
  Waves a mighty shadow in;
With manner bland
Doth ask the maiden's hand,
  Doth with her the dance begin.

Danced in sable iron sark,
Danced a measure weird and dark,
  Coldly clasped her limbs around;
From breast and hair
Down fall from her the fair
  Flowerets, faded, to the ground.

To the sumptuous banquet came
Every Knight and every Dame,
 'Twixt son and daughter all distraught,
With mournful mind
The ancient King reclined,
 Gazed at them in silent thought.

Pale the children both did look,
But the guest a beaker took:
  "Golden wine will make you whole!"
The children drank,
Gave many a courteous thank:
   "O, that draught was very cool!"

Each the father's breast embraces,
Son and daughter; and their faces
  Colorless grow utterly;
Whichever way
Looks the fear-struck father gray,
  He beholds his children die.

"Woe! the blessed children both
Takest thou in the joy of youth;
  Take me, too, the joyless father!"
Spake the grim Guest,
From his hollow, cavernous breast;
  "Roses in the spring I gather!"



SONG OF THE SILENT LAND

BY JOHAN GAUDENZ VON SALISSEEWIS

Into the Silent Land!
Ah! who shall lead us thither?
Clouds in the evening sky more darkly gather,
And shattered wrecks lie thicker on the strand.
Who leads us with a gentle hand
Thither, O thither,
Into the Silent Land?

Into the Silent Land!
To you, ye boundless regions
Of all perfection! Tender morning-visions
Of beauteous souls! The Future's pledge and band!
Who in Life's battle firm doth stand,
Shall bear Hope's tender blossoms
Into the Silent Land!

O Land! O Land!
For all the broken-hearted
The mildest herald by our fate allotted,
Beckons, and with inverted torch doth stand
To lead us with a gentle hand
To the land of the great Departed,
Into the Silent Land!



THE LUCK OF EDENHALL

BY JOHAN LUDWIG UHLAND

OF Edenhall, the youthful Lord
Bids sound the festal trumpet's call;
He rises at the banquet board,
And cries, 'mid the drunken revellers all,
"Now bring me the Luck of Edenhall!"

The butler hears the words with pain,
The house's oldest seneschal,
Takes slow from its silken cloth again
The drinking-glass of crystal tall;
They call it The Luck of Edenhall.

Then said the Lord: "This glass to praise,
Fill with red wine from Portugal!"
The graybeard with trembling hand obeys;
A purple light shines over all,
It beams from the Luck of Edenhall.

Then speaks the Lord, and waves it light:
"This glass of flashing crystal tall
Gave to my sires the Fountain-Sprite;
She wrote in it, If this glass doth fall,
Farewell then, O Luck of Edenhall!

"'T was right a goblet the Fate should be
Of the joyous race of Edenhall!
Deep draughts drink we right willingly:
And willingly ring, with merry call,
Kling! klang! to the Luck of Edenhall!"

First rings it deep, and full, and mild,
Like to the song of a nightingale
Then like the roar of a torrent wild;
Then mutters at last like the thunder's fall,
The glorious Luck of Edenhall.

"For its keeper takes a race of might,
The fragile goblet of crystal tall;
It has lasted longer than is right;
King! klang!--with a harder blow than all
Will I try the Luck of Edenhall!"

As the goblet ringing flies apart,
Suddenly cracks the vaulted hall;
And through the rift, the wild flames start;
The guests in dust are scattered all,
With the breaking Luck of Edenhall!

In storms the foe, with fire and sword;
He in the night had scaled the wall,
Slain by the sword lies the youthful Lord,
But holds in his hand the crystal tall,
The shattered Luck of Edenhall.

On the morrow the butler gropes alone,
The graybeard in the desert hall,
He seeks his Lord's burnt skeleton,
He seeks in the dismal ruin's fall
The shards of the Luck of Edenhall.

"The stone wall," saith he, "doth fall aside,
Down must the stately columns fall;
Glass is this earth's Luck and Pride;
In atoms shall fall this earthly ball
One day like the Luck of Edenhall!"



THE TWO LOCKS OF HAIR

BY GUSTAV PFIZER

A youth, light-hearted and content,
  I wander through the world
Here, Arab-like, is pitched my tent
  And straight again is furled.

Yet oft I dream, that once a wife
  Close in my heart was locked,
And in the sweet repose of life
  A blessed child I rocked.

I wake! Away that dream,--away!
  Too long did it remain!
So long, that both by night and day
  It ever comes again.

The end lies ever in my thought;
  To a grave so cold and deep
The mother beautiful was brought;
  Then dropt the child asleep.

But now the dream is wholly o'er,
  I bathe mine eyes and see;
And wander through the world once more,
  A youth so light and free.

Two locks--and they are wondrous fair--
  Left me that vision mild;
The brown is from the mother's hair,
  The blond is from the child.

And when I see that lock of gold,
  Pale grows the evening-red;
And when the dark lock I behold,
  I wish that I were dead.



THE HEMLOCK TREE.

O hemlock tree!  O hemlock tree! how faithful are thy branches!
    Green not alone in summer time,
    But in the winter's frost and rime!
O hemlock tree!  O hemlock tree! how faithful are thy branches!

O maiden fair!  O maiden fair! how faithless is thy bosom!
    To love me in prosperity,
    And leave me in adversity!
O maiden fair!  O maiden fair! how faithless is thy bosom!

The nightingale, the nightingale, thou tak'st for thine example!
    So long as summer laughs she sings,
    But in the autumn spreads her wings.
The nightingale, the nightingale, thou tak'st for thine example!

The meadow brook, the meadow brook, is mirror of thy falsehood!
    It flows so long as falls the rain,
    In drought its springs soon dry again.
The meadow brook, the meadow brook, is mirror of thy falsehood!



ANNIE OF THARAW

BY SIMON DACH

Annie of Tharaw, my true love of old,
She is my life, and my goods, and my gold.

Annie of Tharaw, her heart once again
To me has surrendered in joy and in pain.

Annie of Tharaw, my riches, my good,
Thou, O my soul, my flesh, and my blood!

Then come the wild weather, come sleet or come snow,
We will stand by each other, however it blow.

Oppression, and sickness, and sorrow, and pain
Shall be to our true love as links to the chain.

As the palm-tree standeth so straight and so tall,
The more the hail beats, and the more the rains fall,--

So love in our hearts shall grow mighty and strong,
Through crosses, through sorrows, through manifold wrong.

Shouldst thou be torn from me to wander alone
In a desolate land where the sun is scarce known,--

Through forests I'll follow, and where the sea flows,
Through ice, and through iron, through armies of foes,

Annie of Tharaw, my light and my sun,
The threads of our two lives are woven in one.

Whate'er I have bidden thee thou hast obeyed,
Whatever forbidden thou hast not gainsaid.

How in the turmoil of life can love stand,
Where there is not one heart, and one mouth, and one hand?

Some seek for dissension, and trouble, and strife;
Like a dog and a cat live such man and wife.

Annie of Tharaw, such is not our love;
Thou art my lambkin, my chick, and my dove.

Whate'er my desire is, in thine may be seen;
I am king of the household, and thou art its queen.

It is this, O my Annie, my heart's sweetest rest,
That makes of us twain but one soul in one breast.

This turns to a heaven the hut where we dwell;
While wrangling soon changes a home to a hell.



THE STATUE OVER THE CATHEDRAL DOOR

BY JULIUS MOSEN

Forms of saints and kings are standing
  The cathedral door above;
Yet I saw but one among them
  Who hath soothed my soul with love.

In his mantle,--wound about him,
  As their robes the sowers wind,--
Bore he swallows and their fledglings,
  Flowers and weeds of every kind.

And so stands he calm and childlike,
  High in wind and tempest wild;
O, were I like him exalted,
  I would be like him, a child!

And my songs,--green leaves and blossoms,--
  To the doors of heaven would hear,
Calling even in storm and tempest,
  Round me still these birds of air.



THE LEGEND OF THE CROSSBILL

BY JULIUS MOSEN

On the cross the dying Saviour
  Heavenward lifts his eyelids calm,
Feels, but scarcely feels, a trembling
  In his pierced and bleeding palm.

And by all the world forsaken,
  Sees he how with zealous care
At the ruthless nail of iron
  A little bird is striving there.

Stained with blood and never tiring,
  With its beak it doth not cease,
From the cross 't would free the Saviour,
  Its Creator's Son release.

And the Saviour speaks in mildness:
  "Blest be thou of all the good!
Bear, as token of this moment,
  Marks of blood and holy rood!"

And that bird is called the crossbill;
  Covered all with blood so clear,
In the groves of pine it singeth
  Songs, like legends, strange to hear.



THE SEA HATH ITS PEARLS

BY HEINRICH HEINE

The sea hath its pearls,
  The heaven hath its stars;
But my heart, my heart,
  My heart hath its love.

Great are the sea and the heaven;
  Yet greater is my heart,
And fairer than pearls and stars
  Flashes and beams my love.

Thou little, youthful maiden,
  Come unto my great heart;
My heart, and the sea, and the heaven
  Are melting away with love!



POETIC APHORISMS

FROM THE SINNGEDICHTE OF FRIEDRICH VON LOGAU

MONEY

Whereunto is money good?
Who has it not wants hardihood,
Who has it has much trouble and care,
Who once has had it has despair.


THE BEST MEDICINES

Joy and Temperance and Repose
Slam the door on the doctor's nose.


SIN

Man-like is it to fall into sin,
Fiend-like is it to dwell therein,
Christ-like is it for sin to grieve,
God-like is it all sin to leave.


POVERTY AND BLINDNESS

A blind man is a poor man, and blind a poor man is;
For the former seeth no man, and the latter no man sees.


LAW OF LIFE

Live I, so live I,
To my Lord heartily,
To my Prince faithfully,
To my Neighbor honestly.
Die I, so die I.


CREEDS

Lutheran, Popish, Calvinistic, all these creeds and doctrines three
Extant are; but still the doubt is, where Christianity may be.


THE RESTLESS HEART

A millstone and the human heart are driven ever round;
If they have nothing else to grind, they must themselves be ground.


CHRISTIAN LOVE

Whilom Love was like a tire, and warmth and comfort it bespoke;
But, alas! it now is quenched, and only bites us, like the smoke.


ART AND TACT

Intelligence and courtesy not always are combined;
Often in a wooden house a golden room we find.


RETRIBUTION

Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though with patience he stands waiting, with exactness grinds he all.


TRUTH

When by night the frogs are croaking, kindle but a torch's fire,
Ha! how soon they all are silent!  Thus Truth silences the liar.


RHYMES

If perhaps these rhymes of mine should sound not well in strangers' ears,
They have only to bethink them that it happens so with theirs;
For so long as words, like mortals, call a fatherland their own,
They will be most highly valued where they are best and longest known.


SILENT LOVE

Who love would seek,
  Let him love evermore
And seldom speak;
  For in love's domain
  Silence must reign;
Or it brings the heart
  Smart
    And pain.



BLESSED ARE THE DEAD

BY SIMON DACH

Oh, how blest are ye whose toils are ended!
Who, through death, have unto God ascended!
Ye have arisen
From the cares which keep us still in prison.

We are still as in a dungeon living,
Still oppressed with sorrow and misgiving;
Our undertakings
Are but toils, and troubles, and heart-breakings.

Ye meanwhile, are in your chambers sleeping,
Quiet, and set free from all our weeping;
No cross nor trial
Hinders your enjoyments with denial.

Christ has wiped away your tears for ever;
Ye have that for which we still endeavor.
To you are chanted
Songs which yet no mortal ear have haunted.

Ah! who would not, then, depart with gladness,
To inherit heaven for earthly sadness?
Who here would languish
Longer in bewailing and in anguish?

Come, O Christ, and loose the chains that bind us!
Lead us forth, and cast this world behind us!
With Thee, the Anointed,
Finds the soul its joy and rest appointed.




WANDERER'S NIGHT-SONGS

BY JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE

I

Thou that from the heavens art,
Every pain and sorrow stillest,
And the doubly wretched heart
Doubly with refreshment fillest,
I am weary with contending!
Why this rapture and unrest?
Peace descending
Come, ah, come into my breast!


II

O'er all the hill-tops
Is quiet now,
In all the tree-tops
Hearest thou
Hardly a breath;
The birds are asleep in the trees:
Wait; soon like these
Thou too shalt rest.



REMORSE

BY AUGUST VON PLATEN

How I started up in the night, in the night,
  Drawn on without rest or reprieval!
The streets, with their watchmen, were lost to my sight,
  As I wandered so light
  In the night, in the night,
Through the gate with the arch mediaeval.

The mill-brook rushed from the rocky height,
  I leaned o'er the bridge in my yearning;
Deep under me watched I the waves in their flight,
  As they glided so light
  In the night, in the night,
Yet backward not one was returning.

O'erhead were revolving, so countless and bright,
  The stars in melodious existence;
And with them the moon, more serenely bedight;--
  They sparkled so light
  In the night, in the night,
Through the magical, measureless distance.

And upward I gazed in the night, in the night,
  And again on the waves in their fleeting;
Ah woe! thou hast wasted thy days in delight,
  Now silence thou light,
  In the night, in the night,
The remorse in thy heart that is beating.



FORSAKEN.

Something the heart must have to cherish,
  Must love and joy and sorrow learn,
Something with passion clasp or perish,
  And in itself to ashes burn.

So to this child my heart is clinging,
  And its frank eyes, with look intense,
Me from a world of sin are bringing
  Back to a world of innocence.

Disdain must thou endure forever;
  Strong may thy heart in danger be!
Thou shalt not fail! but ah, be never
  False as thy father was to me.

Never will I forsake thee, faithless,
  And thou thy mother ne'er forsake,
Until her lips are white and breathless,
  Until in death her eyes shall break.



ALLAH

BY SIEGFRIED AUGUST MAHLMANN

Allah gives light in darkness,
  Allah gives rest in pain,
Cheeks that are white with weeping
  Allah paints red again.

The flowers and the blossoms wither,
 Years vanish with flying fleet;
But my heart will live on forever,
  That here in sadness beat.

Gladly to Allah's dwelling
  Yonder would I take flight;
There will the darkness vanish,
  There will my eyes have sight.


**********


FROM THE ANGLO-SAXON

THE GRAVE

For thee was a house built
Ere thou wast born,
For thee was a mould meant
Ere thou of mother camest.
But it is not made ready,
Nor its depth measured,
Nor is it seen
How long it shall be.
Now I bring thee
Where thou shalt be;
Now I shall measure thee,
And the mould afterwards.

  Thy house is not
Highly timbered,
It is unhigh and low;
When thou art therein,
The heel-ways are low,
The side-ways unhigh.
The roof is built
Thy breast full nigh,
So thou shalt in mould
Dwell full cold,
Dimly and dark.

  Doorless is that house,
And dark it is within;
There thou art fast detained
And Death hath the key.
Loathsome is that earth-house,
And grim within to dwell.
There thou shalt dwell,
And worms shall divide thee.
  Thus thou art laid,

And leavest thy friends
Thou hast no friend,
Who will come to thee,
Who will ever see
How that house pleaseth thee;
Who will ever open
The door for thee,
And descend after thee;
For soon thou art loathsome
And hateful to see.



BEOWULF'S EXPEDITION TO HEORT.

Thus then, much care-worn,
The son of Healfden
Sorrowed evermore,
Nor might the prudent hero
His woes avert.
The war was too hard,
Too loath and longsome,
That on the people came,
Dire wrath and grim,
Of night-woes the worst.
This from home heard
Higelac's Thane,
Good among the Goths,
Grendel's deeds.
He was of mankind
In might the strongest,
At that day
Of this life,
Noble and stalwart.
He bade him a sea-ship,
A goodly one, prepare.
Quoth he, the war-king,
Over the swan's road,
Seek he would
The mighty monarch,
Since he wanted men.
For him that journey
His prudent fellows
Straight made ready,
Those that loved him.
They excited their souls,
The omen they beheld.
Had the good-man
Of the Gothic people
Champions chosen,
Of those that keenest
He might find,
Some fifteen men.
The sea-wood sought he.
The warrior showed,
Sea-crafty man!
The land-marks,
And first went forth.
The ship was on the waves,
Boat under the cliffs.
The barons ready
To the prow mounted.
The streams they whirled
The sea against the sands.
The chieftains bore
On the naked breast
Bright ornaments,
War-gear, Goth-like.
The men shoved off,
Men on their willing way,
The bounden wood.
  Then went over the sea-waves,
Hurried by the wind,
The ship with foamy neck,
Most like a sea-fowl,
Till about one hour
Of the second day
The curved prow
Had passed onward
So that the sailors
The land saw,
The shore-cliffs shining,
Mountains steep,
And broad sea-noses.
Then was the sea-sailing
Of the Earl at an end.
  Then up speedily
The Weather people
On the land went,
The sea-bark moored,
Their mail-sarks shook,
Their war-weeds.
God thanked they,
That to them the sea-journey
Easy had been.
  Then from the wall beheld
The warden of the Scyldings,
He who the sea-cliffs
Had in his keeping,
Bear o'er the balks
The bright shields,
The war-weapons speedily.
Him the doubt disturbed
In his mind's thought,
What these men might be.
  Went then to the shore,
On his steed riding,
The Thane of Hrothgar.
Before the host he shook
His warden's-staff in hand,
In measured words demanded:
  "What men are ye
War-gear wearing,
Host in harness,
Who thus the brown keel
Over the water-street
Leading come
Hither over the sea?
  I these boundaries
As shore-warden hold,
That in the Land of the Danes
Nothing loathsome
With a ship-crew
Scathe us might. . . .
Ne'er saw I mightier
Earl upon earth
Than is your own,
Hero in harness.
Not seldom this warrior
Is in weapons distinguished;
Never his beauty belies him,
His peerless countenance!
Now would I fain
Your origin know,
Ere ye forth
As false spies
Into the Land of the Danes
Farther fare.
Now, ye dwellers afar-off!
Ye sailors of the sea!
Listen to my
One-fold thought.
Quickest is best
To make known
Whence your coming may be."



THE SOUL'S COMPLAINT AGAINST THE BODY

FROM THE ANGLO-SAXON

Much it behoveth
Each one of mortals,
That he his soul's journey
In himself ponder,
How deep it may be.
When Death cometh,
The bonds he breaketh
By which were united
The soul and the body.

Long it is thenceforth
Ere the soul taketh
From God himself
Its woe or its weal;
As in the world erst,
Even in its earth-vessel,
It wrought before.

The soul shall come
Wailing with loud voice,
After a sennight,
The soul, to find
The body
That it erst dwelt in;--
Three hundred winters,
Unless ere that worketh
The Eternal Lord,
The Almighty God,
The end of the world.

Crieth then, so care-worn,
With cold utterance,
And speaketh grimly,
The ghost to the dust:
"Dry dust! thou dreary one!
How little didst thou labor for me!
In the foulness of earth
Thou all wearest away
Like to the loam!
Little didst thou think
How thy soul's journey
Would be thereafter,
When from the body
It should be led forth."



FROM THE FRENCH

SONG

FROM THE PARADISE OF LOVE

         Hark! hark!
         Pretty lark!
Little heedest thou my pain!
But if to these longing arms
Pitying Love would yield the charms
         Of the fair
         With smiling air,
Blithe would beat my heart again.


         Hark! hark!
         Pretty lark!
Little heedest thou my pain!
Love may force me still to bear,
While he lists, consuming care;
         But in anguish
         Though I languish,
Faithful shall my heart remain.

         Hark! hark!
         Pretty lark!
Little heedest thou my pain!
Then cease, Love, to torment me so;
But rather than all thoughts forego
         Of the fair
         With flaxen hair,
Give me back her frowns again.

         Hark! hark!
         Pretty lark!
Little heedest thou my pain!



SONG

And whither goest thou, gentle sigh,
  Breathed so softly in my ear?
  Say, dost thou bear his fate severe
To Love's poor martyr doomed to die?
Come, tell me quickly,--do not lie;
  What secret message bring'st thou here?
And whither goest thou, gentle sigh,
  Breathed so softly in my ear?
May heaven conduct thee to thy will
  And safely speed thee on thy way;
  This only I would humbly pray,--
Pierce deep,--but oh! forbear to kill.
And whither goest thou, gentle sigh,
  Breathed so softly in my ear?


THE RETURN OF SPRING

BY CHARLES D'ORLEANS

Now Time throws off his cloak again
Of ermined frost, and wind, and rain,
And clothes him in the embroidery
Of glittering sun and clear blue sky.
With beast and bird the forest rings,
Each in his jargon cries or sings;
And Time throws off his cloak again.
Of ermined frost, and wind, and rain.

River, and fount, and tinkling brook
Wear in their dainty livery
Drops of silver jewelry;
In new-made suit they merry look;
And Time throws off his cloak again
Of ermined frost, and wind, and rain.



SPRING

BY CHARLES D'ORLEANS

Gentle Spring! in sunshine clad,
  Well dost thou thy power display!
For Winter maketh the light heart sad,
  And thou, thou makest the sad heart gay.
He sees thee, and calls to his gloomy train,
The sleet, and the snow, and the wind, and the rain;
And they shrink away, and they flee in fear,
  When thy merry step draws near.
Winter giveth the fields and the trees, so old,
  Their beards of icicles and snow;
And the rain, it raineth so fast and cold,
  We must cower over the embers low;
And, snugly housed from the wind and weather,
Mope like birds that are changing feather.
But the storm retires, and the sky grows clear,
  When thy merry step draws near.
Winter maketh the sun in the gloomy sky
  Wrap him round with a mantle of cloud;
But, Heaven be praised, thy step is nigh;
  Thou tearest away the mournful shroud,
And the earth looks bright, and Winter surly,
Who has toiled for naught both late and early,
Is banished afar by the new-born year,
  When thy merry step draws near.



THE CHILD ASLEEP

BY CLOTILDE DE SURVILLE

Sweet babe! true portrait of thy father's face,
  Sleep on the bosom that thy lips have pressed!
Sleep, little one; and closely, gently place
  Thy drowsy eyelid on thy mother's breast.
Upon that tender eye, my little friend,
  Soft sleep shall come, that cometh not to me!
I watch to see thee, nourish thee, defend;
  'T is sweet to watch for thee, alone for thee!
His arms fall down; sleep sits upon his brow;
  His eye is closed; he sleeps, nor dreams of harm.
Wore not his cheek the apple's ruddy glow,
  Would you not say he slept on Death's cold arm?

Awake, my boy!  I tremble with affright!
  Awake, and chase this fatal thought!  Unclose
Thine eye but for one moment on the light!
  Even at the price of thine, give me repose!
Sweet error! he but slept, I breathe again;
  Come, gentle dreams, the hour of sleep beguile!
O, when shall he, for whom I sigh in vain,
  Beside me watch to see thy waking smile?



DEATH OF ARCHBISHOP TURPIN

FROM THE CHANSON DE ROLAND

The Archbishop, whom God loved in high degree,
Beheld his wounds all bleeding fresh and free;
And then his cheek more ghastly grew and wan,
And a faint shudder through his members ran.
Upon the battle-field his knee was bent;
Brave Roland saw, and to his succor went,
Straightway his helmet from his brow unlaced,
And tore the shining hauberk from his breast.
Then raising in his arms the man of God,
Gently he laid him on the verdant sod.
"Rest, Sire," he cried,--"for rest thy suffering needs."
The priest replied, "Think but of warlike deeds!
The field is ours; well may we boast this strife!
But death steals on,--there is no hope of life;
In paradise, where Almoners live again,
There are our couches spread, there shall we rest from pain."

Sore Roland grieved; nor marvel I, alas!
That thrice he swooned upon the thick green grass.
When he revived, with a loud voice cried he,
"O Heavenly Father!  Holy Saint Marie!
Why lingers death to lay me in my grave!
Beloved France! how have the good and brave
Been torn from thee, and left thee weak and poor!"
Then thoughts of Aude, his lady-love, came o'er
His spirit, and he whispered soft and slow,
"My gentle friend!--what parting full of woe!
Never so true a liegeman shalt thou see;--
Whate'er my fate, Christ's benison on thee!
Christ, who did save from realms of woe beneath,
The Hebrew Prophets from the second death."
Then to the Paladins, whom well he knew,
He went, and one by one unaided drew
To Turpin's side, well skilled in ghostly lore;--
No heart had he to smile, but, weeping sore,
He blessed them in God's name, with faith that He
Would soon vouchsafe to them a glad eternity.

The Archbishop, then, on whom God's benison rest,
Exhausted, bowed his head upon his breast;--
His mouth was full of dust and clotted gore,
And many a wound his swollen visage bore.
Slow beats his heart, his panting bosom heaves,
Death comes apace,--no hope of cure relieves.
Towards heaven he raised his dying hands and prayed
That God, who for our sins was mortal made,
Born of the Virgin, scorned and crucified,
In paradise would place him by His side.

Then Turpin died in service of Charlon,
In battle great and eke great orison;--
'Gainst Pagan host alway strong champion;
God grant to him His holy benison.



THE BLIND GIRL OF CASTEL CUILLE

BY JACQUES JASMIN

Only the Lowland tongue of Scotland might
Rehearse this little tragedy aright;
Let me attempt it with an English quill;
And take, O Reader, for the deed the will.

I

    At the foot of the mountain height
    Where is perched Castel Cuille,
When the apple, the plum, and the almond tree
    In the plain below were growing white,
    This is the song one might perceive
On a Wednesday morn of Saint Joseph's Eve:

"The roads should blossom, the roads should bloom,
So fair a bride shall leave her home!
Should blossom and bloom with garlands gay,
So fair a bride shall pass to-day!"

This old Te Deum, rustic rites attending,
   Seemed from the clouds descending;
   When lo! a merry company
Of rosy village girls, clean as the eye,
   Each one with her attendant swain,
Came to the cliff, all singing the same strain;
Resembling there, so near unto the sky,
Rejoicing angels, that kind Heaven has sent
For their delight and our encouragement.
     Together blending,
     And soon descending
     The narrow sweep
     Of the hillside steep,
     They wind aslant
     Towards Saint Amant,
     Through leafy alleys
     Of verdurous valleys
     With merry sallies
     Singing their chant:

"The roads should blossom, the roads should bloom,
So fair a bride shall leave her home!
Should blossom and bloom with garlands gay,
So fair a bride shall pass to-day!

It is Baptiste, and his affianced maiden,
With garlands for the bridal laden!

The sky was blue; without one cloud of gloom,
  The sun of March was shining brightly,
And to the air the freshening wind gave lightly
  Its breathings of perfume.

When one beholds the dusky hedges blossom,
A rustic bridal, oh! how sweet it is!
  To sounds of joyous melodies,
That touch with tenderness the trembling bosom,
    A band of maidens
    Gayly frolicking,
    A band of youngsters
    Wildly rollicking!
      Kissing,
      Caressing,
  With fingers pressing,
    Till in the veriest
  Madness of mirth, as they dance,
  They retreat and advance,
    Trying whose laugh shall be loudest and merriest;
  While the bride, with roguish eyes,
Sporting with them, now escapes and cries:
    "Those who catch me
      Married verily
      This year shall be!"

    And all pursue with eager haste,
    And all attain what they pursue,
And  touch her pretty apron fresh and new,
    And the linen kirtle round her waist.

    Meanwhile, whence comes it that among
    These youthful maidens fresh and fair,
    So joyous, with such laughing air,
    Baptiste stands sighing, with silent tongue?
    And yet the bride is fair and young!
Is it Saint Joseph would say to us all,
That love, o'er-hasty, precedeth a fall?
    O no! for a maiden frail, I trow,
    Never bore so lofty a brow!
What lovers! they give not a single caress!
To see them so careless and cold to-day,
    These are grand people, one would say.
What ails Baptiste? what grief doth him oppress?

    It is, that half-way up the hill,
    In yon cottage, by whose walls
    Stand the cart-house and the stalls,
    Dwelleth the blind orphan still,
    Daughter of a veteran old;
    And you must know, one year ago,
    That Margaret, the young and tender,
    Was the village pride and splendor,
    And Baptiste her lover bold.
    Love, the deceiver, them ensnared;
    For them the altar was prepared;
    But alas! the summer's blight,
    The dread disease that none can stay,
    The pestilence that walks by night,
    Took the young bride's sight away.

All at the father's stern command was changed;
Their peace was gone, but not their love estranged.
Wearied at home, erelong the lover fled;
    Returned but three short days ago,
    The golden chain they round him throw,
    He is enticed, and onward led
    To marry Angela, and yet
    Is thinking ever of Margaret.

    Then suddenly a maiden cried,
    "Anna, Theresa, Mary, Kate!
Here comes the cripple Jane!"  And by a fountain's side
    A woman, bent and gray with years,
    Under the mulberry-trees appears,
    And all towards her run, as fleet
    As had they wings upon their feet.

    It is that Jane, the cripple Jane,
    Is a soothsayer, wary and kind.
She telleth fortunes, and none complain.
    She promises one a village swain,
    Another a happy wedding-day,
    And the bride a lovely boy straightway.
    All comes to pass as she avers;
    She never deceives, she never errs.

    But for this once the village seer
    Wears a countenance severe,
And from beneath her eyebrows thin and white
    Her two eyes flash like cannons bright
    Aimed at the bridegroom in waistcoat blue,
    Who, like a statue, stands in view;
    Changing color as well he might,
    When the beldame wrinkled and gray
    Takes the young bride by the hand,
    And, with the tip of her reedy wand
    Making the sign of the cross, doth say:--
    "Thoughtless Angela, beware!
    Lest, when thou weddest this false bridegroom,
    Thou diggest for thyself a tomb!"
And she was silent; and the maidens fair
Saw from each eye escape a swollen tear;
But on a little streamlet silver-clear,
    What are two drops of turbid rain?
    Saddened a moment, the bridal train
    Resumed the dance and song again;
The bridegroom only was pale with fear;--
      And down green alleys
      Of verdurous valleys,
      With merry sallies,
      They sang the refrain:--

"The roads should blossom, the roads should bloom,
So fair a bride shall leave her home!
Should blossom and bloom with garlands gay,
So fair a bride shall pass to-day!"


II

And by suffering worn and weary,
But beautiful as some fair angel yet,
Thus lamented Margaret,
In her cottage lone and dreary;--

    "He has arrived! arrived at last!
Yet Jane has named him not these three days past;
    Arrived! yet keeps aloof so far!
And knows that of my night he is the star!
Knows that long months I wait alone, benighted,
And count the moments since he went away!
Come! keep the promise of that happier day,
That I may keep the faith to thee I plighted!
What joy have I without thee? what delight?
Grief wastes my life, and makes it misery;
Day for the others ever, but for me
    Forever night! forever night!
When he is gone 't is dark! my soul is sad!
I suffer! O my God! come, make me glad.
When he is near, no thoughts of day intrude;
Day has blue heavens, but Baptiste has blue eyes!
Within them shines for me a heaven of love,
A heaven all happiness, like that above,
    No more of grief! no more of lassitude!
Earth I forget,--and heaven, and all distresses,
When seated by my side my hand he presses;
    But when alone, remember all!
Where is Baptiste? he hears not when I call!
A branch of ivy, dying on the ground,
    I need some bough to twine around!
In pity come! be to my suffering kind!
True love, they say, in grief doth more abound!
    What then--when one is blind?

    "Who knows? perhaps I am forsaken!
Ah! woe is me! then bear me to my grave!
    O God! what thoughts within me waken!
Away! he will return!  I do but rave!
    He will return!  I need not fear!
    He swore it by our Saviour dear;
    He could not come at his own will;
    Is weary, or perhaps is ill!
    Perhaps his heart, in this disguise,
    Prepares for me some sweet surprise!
But some one comes!  Though blind, my heart can see!
And that deceives me not! 't is he! 't is he!"

    And the door ajar is set,
    And poor, confiding Margaret
Rises, with outstretched arms, but sightless eyes;
'T is only Paul, her brother, who thus cries:--
    "Angela the bride has passed!
    I saw the wedding guests go by;
Tell me, my sister, why were we not asked?
    For all are there but you and I!"

    "Angela married! and not send
    To tell her secret unto me!
    O, speak! who may the bridegroom be?"
    "My sister, 't is Baptiste, thy friend!"

A cry the blind girl gave, but nothing said;
A milky whiteness spreads upon her cheeks;
    An icy hand, as heavy as lead,
    Descending, as her brother speaks,
    Upon her heart, that has ceased to beat,
    Suspends awhile its life and heat.
She stands beside the boy, now sore distressed,
A wax Madonna as a peasant dressed.

    At length, the bridal song again
    Brings her back to her sorrow and pain.

    "Hark! the joyous airs are ringing!
    Sister, dost thou hear them singing?
    How merrily they laugh and jest!
    Would we were bidden with the rest!
    I would don my hose of homespun gray,
    And my doublet of linen striped and gay;
    Perhaps they will come; for they do not wed
    Till to-morrow at seven o'clock, it is said!"

    "I know it!" answered Margaret;
Whom the vision, with aspect black as jet,
    Mastered again; and its hand of ice
Held her heart crushed, as in a vice!
    "Paul, be not sad!  'T is a holiday;
    To-morrow put on thy doublet gay!
    But leave me now for a while alone."
    Away, with a hop and a jump, went Paul,
    And, as he whistled along the hall,
    Entered Jane, the crippled crone.

    "Holy Virgin! what dreadful heat!
    I am faint, and weary, and out of breath!
    But thou art cold,--art chill as death;
    My little friend! what ails thee, sweet?"
"Nothing!  I heard them singing home the bride;
    And, as I listened to the song,
    I thought my turn would come erelong,
    Thou knowest it is at Whitsuntide.
    Thy cards forsooth can never lie,
    To me such joy they prophesy,
    Thy skill shall be vaunted far and wide
    When they behold him at my side.
    And poor Baptiste, what sayest thou?
It must seem long to him;--methinks I see him now!"
    Jane, shuddering, her hand doth press:
    "Thy love I cannot all approve;
We must not trust too much to happiness;--
Go, pray to God, that thou mayst love him less!"
    "The more I pray, the more I love!
It is no sin, for God is on my side!"
It was enough; and Jane no more replied.

Now to all hope her heart is barred and cold;
    But to deceive the beldame old
    She takes a sweet, contented air;
    Speak of foul weather or of fair,
    At every word the maiden smiles!
    Thus the beguiler she beguiles;
So that, departing at the evening's close,
    She says, "She may be saved! she nothing knows!"

    Poor Jane, the cunning sorceress!
Now that thou wouldst, thou art no prophetess!
This morning, in the fulness of thy heart,
    Thou wast so, far beyond thine art!


III

Now rings the bell, nine times reverberating,
And the white daybreak, stealing up the sky,
Sees in two cottages two maidens waiting,
      How differently!

Queen of a day, by flatterers caressed,
    The one puts on her cross and crown,
    Decks with a huge bouquet her breast,
    And flaunting, fluttering up and down,
    Looks at herself, and cannot rest,
    The other, blind, within her little room,
    Has neither crown nor flower's perfume;
But in their stead for something gropes apart,
    That in a drawer's recess doth lie,
And, 'neath her bodice of bright scarlet dye,
    Convulsive clasps it to her heart.

    The one, fantastic, light as air,
      'Mid kisses ringing,
      And joyous singing,
    Forgets to say her morning prayer!

The other, with cold drops upon her brow,
  Joins her two hands, and kneels upon the floor,
And whispers, as her brother opes the door,
    "O God! forgive me now!"

    And then the orphan, young and blind,
    Conducted by her brother's hand,
    Towards the church, through paths unscanned,
    With tranquil air, her way doth wind.
Odors of laurel, making her faint and pale,
    Round her at times exhale,
And  in the sky as yet no sunny ray,
    But brumal vapors gray.

    Near that castle, fair to see,
Crowded with sculptures old, in every part,
    Marvels of nature and of art,
      And proud of its name of high degree,
    A little chapel, almost bare
    At the base of the rock, is builded there;
    All glorious that it lifts aloof,
    Above each jealous cottage roof,
Its sacred summit, swept by autumn gales,
    And its blackened steeple high in air,
    Round which the osprey screams and sails.

    "Paul, lay thy noisy rattle by!"
Thus Margaret said.  "Where are we? we ascend!"
    "Yes; seest thou not our journey's end?
Hearest not the osprey from the belfry cry?
The hideous bird, that brings ill luck, we know!
Dost thou remember when our father said,
    The night we watched beside his bed,
    'O daughter, I am weak and low;
Take care of Paul; I feel that I am dying!'
And thou, and he, and I, all fell to crying?
Then on the roof the osprey screamed aloud;
And here they brought our father in his shroud.
There is his grave; there stands the cross we set;
Why dost thou clasp me so, dear Margaret?
    Come in!  The bride will be here soon:
Thou tremblest!  O my God! thou art going to swoon!"

She could no more,--the blind girl, weak and weary!
A voice seemed crying from that grave so dreary,
"What wouldst thou do, my daughter?"--and she started,
    And quick recoiled, aghast, faint-hearted;
But Paul, impatient, urges evermore
    Her steps towards the open door;
And when, beneath her feet, the unhappy maid
Crushes the laurel near the house immortal,
And with her head, as Paul talks on again,
    Touches the crown of filigrane
    Suspended from the low-arched portal,
    No more restrained, no more afraid,
    She walks, as for a feast arrayed,
And in the ancient chapel's sombre night
    They both are lost to sight.

        At length the bell,
        With booming sound,
        Sends forth, resounding round.
Its hymeneal peal o'er rock and down the dell.
    It is broad day, with sunshine and with rain;
      And yet the guests delay not long,
      For soon arrives the bridal train,
      And with it brings the village throng.

In sooth, deceit maketh no mortal gay,
For lo! Baptiste on this triumphant day,
Mute as an idiot, sad as yester-morning,
Thinks only of the beldame's words of warning.

And Angela thinks of her cross, I wis;
To be a bride is all!  The pretty lisper
Feels her heart swell to hear all round her whisper,
"How beautiful! how beautiful she is!".

    But she must calm that giddy head,
    For already the Mass is said;
    At the holy table stands the priest;
The wedding ring is blessed; Baptiste receives it;
Ere on the finger of the bride he leaves it,
    He must pronounce one word at least!
'T is spoken; and sudden at the grooms-man's side
"'T is he!" a well-known voice has cried.
And while the wedding guests all hold their breath,
Opes the confessional, and the blind girl, see!
"Baptiste," she said, "since thou hast wished my death,
As holy water be my blood for thee!"
And calmly in the air a knife suspended!
Doubtless her guardian angel near attended,
    For anguish did its work so well,
    That, ere the fatal stroke descended,
        Lifeless she fell!

    At eve instead of bridal verse,
    The De Profundis filled the air;
    Decked with flowers a simple hearse
    To the churchyard forth they bear;
    Village girls in robes of snow
    Follow, weeping as they go;
    Nowhere was a smile that day,
No, ah no! for each one seemed to say:--

"The road should mourn and be veiled in gloom,
So fair a corpse shall leave its home!
Should mourn and should weep, ah, well-away!
So fair a corpse shall pass to-day!"



A CHRISTMAS CAROL

FROM THE NOEI BOURGUIGNON DE GUI BAROZAI

    I hear along our street
    Pass the minstrel throngs;
    Hark! they play so sweet,
On their hautboys, Christmas songs!
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire!

    In December ring
    Every day the chimes;
    Loud the gleemen sing
In the streets their merry rhymes.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire.

    Shepherds at the grange,
    Where the Babe was born,
    Sang, with many a change,
Christmas carols until morn.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire!

    These good people sang
    Songs devout and sweet;
    While the rafters rang,
There they stood with freezing feet.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire.

    Nuns in frigid veils
    At this holy tide,
    For want of something else,
Christmas songs at times have tried.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them fill the night expire!

    Washerwomen old,
    To the sound they beat,
    Sing by rivers cold,
With uncovered heads and feet.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire.

    Who by the fireside stands
    Stamps his feet and sings;
    But he who blows his hands
Not so gay a carol brings.
      Let us by the fire
      Ever higher
Sing them till the night expire!


CONSOLATION

To M. Duperrier, Gentleman of Aix in Provence, on the
Death of his Daughter.

BY FRANCOISE MALHERBE

Will then, Duperrier, thy sorrow be eternal?
    And shall the sad discourse
Whispered within thy heart, by tenderness paternal,
    Only augment its force?

Thy daughter's mournful fate, into the tomb descending
    By death's frequented ways,
Has it become to thee a labyrinth never ending,
    Where thy lost reason strays?

I know the charms that made her youth a benediction:
    Nor should I be content,
As a censorious friend, to solace thine affliction
    By her disparagement.

But she was of the world, which fairest things exposes
    To fates the most forlorn;
A rose, she too hath lived as long as live the roses,
    The space of one brief morn.

              *    *    *    *    *

Death has his rigorous laws, unparalleled, unfeeling;
    All prayers to him are vain;
Cruel, he stops his ears, and, deaf to our appealing,
    He leaves us to complain.

The poor man in his hut, with only thatch for cover,
    Unto these laws must bend;
The sentinel that guards the barriers of the Louvre
    Cannot our kings defend.

To murmur against death, in petulant defiance,
    Is never for the best;
To will what God doth will, that is the only science
    That gives us any rest.



TO CARDINAL RICHELIEU

BY FRANCOIS DE MALHERBE

Thou mighty Prince of Church and State,
Richelieu! until the hour of death,
Whatever road man chooses, Fate
Still holds him subject to her breath.
Spun of all silks, our days and nights
Have sorrows woven with delights;
And of this intermingled shade
Our various destiny appears,
Even as one sees the course of years
Of summers and of winters made.

Sometimes the soft, deceitful hours
Let us enjoy the halcyon wave;
Sometimes impending peril lowers
Beyond the seaman's skill to save,
The Wisdom, infinitely wise,
That gives to human destinies
Their foreordained necessity,
Has made no law more fixed below,
Than the alternate ebb and flow
Of Fortune and Adversity.


THE ANGEL AND THE CHILD

BY JEAN REBOUL, THE BAKER OF NISMES

An angel with a radiant face,
  Above a cradle bent to look,
Seemed his own image there to trace,
  As in the waters of a brook.

"Dear child! who me resemblest so,"
  It whispered, "come, O come with me!
Happy together let us go,
  The earth unworthy is of thee!

"Here none to perfect bliss attain;
  The soul in pleasure suffering lies;
Joy hath an undertone of pain,
  And even the happiest hours their sighs.

"Fear doth at every portal knock;
  Never a day serene and pure
From the o'ershadowing tempest's shock
  Hath made the morrow's dawn secure.

"What then, shall sorrows and shall fears
  Come to disturb so pure a brow?
And with the bitterness of tears
  These eyes of azure troubled grow?

"Ah no! into the fields of space,
  Away shalt thou escape with me;
And Providence will grant thee grace
  Of all the days that were to be.

"Let no one in thy dwelling cower,
  In sombre vestments draped and veiled;
But let them welcome thy last hour,
  As thy first moments once they hailed.

"Without a cloud be there each brow;
  There let the grave no shadow cast;
When one is pure as thou art now,
  The fairest day is still the last."

And waving wide his wings of white,
  The angel, at these words, had sped
Towards the eternal realms of light!--
  Poor mother! see, thy son is dead!


ON THE TERRACE OF THE AIGALADES

BY JOSEPH MERY

From this high portal, where upsprings
The rose to touch our hands in play,
We at a glance behold three things--
The Sea, the Town, and the Highway.

And the Sea says: My shipwrecks fear;
I drown my best friends in the deep;
And those who braved icy tempests, here
Among my sea-weeds lie asleep!

The Town says: I am filled and fraught
With tumult and with smoke and care;
My days with toil are overwrought,
And in my nights I gasp for air.

The Highway says: My wheel-tracks guide
To the pale climates of the North;
Where my last milestone stands abide
The people to their death gone forth.

Here, in the shade, this life of ours,
Full of delicious air, glides by
Amid a multitude of flowers
As countless as the stars on high;

These red-tiled roofs, this fruitful soil,
Bathed with an azure all divine,
Where springs the tree that gives us oil,
The grape that giveth us the wine;

Beneath these mountains stripped of trees,
Whose tops with flowers are covered o'er,
Where springtime of the Hesperides
Begins, but endeth nevermore;

Under these leafy vaults and walls,
That unto gentle sleep persuade;
This rainbow of the waterfalls,
Of mingled mist and sunshine made;

Upon these shores, where all invites,
We live our languid life apart;
This air is that of life's delights,
The festival of sense and heart;

This limpid space of time prolong,
Forget to-morrow in to-day,
And leave unto the passing throng
The Sea, the Town, and the Highway.


TO MY BROOKLET

BY JEAN FRANCOIS DUCIS

Thou brooklet, all unknown to song,
Hid in the covert of the wood!
Ah, yes, like thee I fear the throng,
Like thee I love the solitude.

O brooklet, let my sorrows past
Lie all forgotten in their graves,
Till in my thoughts remain at last
Only thy peace, thy flowers, thy waves.

The lily by thy margin waits;--
The nightingale, the marguerite;
In shadow here he meditates
His nest, his love, his music sweet.

Near thee the self-collected soul
Knows naught of error or of crime;
Thy waters, murmuring as they roll,
Transform his musings into rhyme.

Ah, when, on bright autumnal eves,
Pursuing still thy course, shall I
Lisp the soft shudder of the leaves,
And hear the lapwing's plaintive cry?



BARREGES

BY LEFRANC DE POMPIGNAN

I leave you, ye cold mountain chains,
Dwelling of warriors stark and frore!
You, may these eyes behold no more,
Rave on the horizon of our plains.

Vanish, ye frightful, gloomy views!
Ye rocks that mount up to the clouds!
Of skies, enwrapped in misty shrouds,
Impracticable avenues!

Ye torrents, that with might and main
Break pathways through the rocky walls,
With your terrific waterfalls
Fatigue no more my weary brain!

Arise, ye landscapes full of charms,
Arise, ye pictures of delight!
Ye brooks, that water in your flight
The flowers and harvests of our farms!

You I perceive, ye meadows green,
Where the Garonne the lowland fills,
Not far from that long chain of hills,
With intermingled vales between.

You wreath of smoke, that mounts so high,
Methinks from my own hearth must come;
With speed, to that beloved home,
Fly, ye too lazy coursers, fly!

And bear me thither, where the soul
In quiet may itself possess,
Where all things soothe the mind's distress,
Where all things teach me and console.


WILL EVER THE DEAR DAYS COME BACK AGAIN?

Will ever the dear days come back again,
  Those days of June, when lilacs were in bloom,
  And bluebirds sang their sonnets in the gloom
  Of leaves that roofed them in from sun or rain?
I know not; but a presence will remain
  Forever and forever in this room,
  Formless, diffused in air, like a perfume,--
  A phantom of the heart, and not the brain.
Delicious days! when every spoken word
  Was like a foot-fall nearer and more near,
  And a mysterious knocking at the gate
Of the heart's secret places, and we heard
  In the sweet tumult of delight and fear
  A voice that whispered, "Open, I cannot wait!"


AT LA CHAUDEAU

BY XAVIER MARMIER

At La Chaudeau,--'t is long since then:
I was young,--my years twice ten;
All things smiled on the happy boy,
Dreams of love and songs of joy,
Azure of heaven and wave below,
     At La Chaudeau.

At La Chaudeau I come back old:
My head is gray, my blood is cold;
Seeking along the meadow ooze,
Seeking beside the river Seymouse,
The days of my spring-time of long ago
     At La Chaudeau.

At La Chaudeau nor heart nor brain
Ever grows old with grief and pain;
A sweet remembrance keeps off age;
A tender friendship doth still assuage
The burden of sorrow that one may know
     At La Chaudeau.

At La Chaudeau, had fate decreed
To limit the wandering life I lead,
Peradventure I still, forsooth,
Should have preserved my fresh green youth,
Under the shadows the hill-tops throw
     At La Chaudeau.

At La Chaudeau, live on, my friends,
Happy to be where God intends;
And sometimes, by the evening fire,
Think of him whose sole desire
Is again to sit in the old chateau
     At La Chaudeau.



A QUIET LIFE.

Let him who will, by force or fraud innate,
  Of courtly grandeurs gain the slippery height;
  I, leaving not the home of my delight,
  Far from the world and noise will meditate.
Then, without pomps or perils of the great,
  I shall behold the day succeed the night;
  Behold the alternate seasons take their flight,
  And in serene repose old age await.
And so, whenever Death shall come to close
  The happy moments that my days compose,
  I, full of years, shall die, obscure, alone!
How wretched is the man, with honors crowned,
  Who, having not the one thing needful found,
  Dies, known to all, but to himself unknown.



THE WINE OF JURANCON

BY CHARLES CORAN

Little sweet wine of Jurancon,
  You are dear to my memory still!
With mine host and his merry song,
 Under the rose-tree I drank my fill.

Twenty years after, passing that way,
  Under the trellis I found again
Mine host, still sitting there au frais,
  And singing still the same refrain.

The Jurancon, so fresh and bold,
  Treats me as one it used to know;
Souvenirs of the days of old
  Already from the bottle flow,

With glass in hand our glances met;
  We pledge, we drink.  How sour it is
Never Argenteuil piquette
  Was to my palate sour as this!

And yet the vintage was good, in sooth;
  The self-same juice, the self-same cask!
It was you, O gayety of my youth,
  That failed in the autumnal flask!



FRIAR LUBIN

BY CLEMENT MAROT

To gallop off to town post-haste,
  So oft, the times I cannot tell;
To do vile deed, nor feel disgraced,--
  Friar Lubin will do it well.
But a sober life to lead,
  To honor virtue, and pursue it,
That's a pious, Christian deed,--
  Friar Lubin can not do it.

To mingle, with a knowing smile,
  The goods of others with his own,
And leave you without cross or pile,
  Friar Lubin stands alone.
To say 't is yours is all in vain,
  If once he lays his finger to it;
For as to giving back again,
  Friar Lubin cannot do it.

With flattering words and gentle tone,
  To woo and win some guileless maid,
Cunning pander need you none,--
  Friar Lubin knows the trade.
Loud preacheth he sobriety,
  But as for water, doth eschew it;
Your dog may drink it,--but not he;
  Friar Lubin cannot do it.

         ENVOY
  When an evil deed 's to do
  Friar Lubin is stout and true;
  Glimmers a ray of goodness through it,
  Friar Lubin cannot do it.



RONDEL

BY JEAN FROISSART

Love, love, what wilt thou with this heart of mine?
  Naught see I fixed or sure in thee!
I do not know thee,--nor what deeds are thine:
Love, love, what wilt thou with this heart of mine?
  Naught see I fixed or sure in thee!

Shall I be mute, or vows with prayers combine?
  Ye who are blessed in loving, tell it me:
Love, love, what wilt thou with this heart of mine?
  Naught see I permanent or sure in thee!



MY SECRET

BY FELIX ARVERS

My soul its secret has, my life too has its mystery,
A love eternal in a moment's space conceived;
Hopeless the evil is, I have not told its history,
And she who was the cause nor knew it nor believed.
Alas! I shall have passed close by her unperceived,
Forever at her side, and yet forever lonely,
I shall unto the end have made life's journey, only
Daring to ask for naught, and having naught received.
For her, though God has made her gentle and endearing,
She will go on her way distraught and without hearing
These murmurings of love that round her steps ascend,
Piously faithful still unto her austere duty,
Will say, when she shall read these lines full of her beauty,
"Who can this woman be?" and will not comprehend.



FROM THE ITALIAN

THE CELESTIAL PILOT

PURGATORIO II. 13-51.

And now, behold! as at the approach of morning,
  Through the gross vapors, Mars grows fiery red
  Down in the west upon the ocean floor
Appeared to me,--may I again behold it!
  A light along the sea, so swiftly coming,
  Its motion by no flight of wing is equalled.
And when therefrom I had withdrawn a little
  Mine eyes, that I might question my conductor,
  Again I saw it brighter grown and larger.
Thereafter, on all sides of it, appeared
  I knew not what of white, and underneath,
  Little by little, there came forth another.
My master yet had uttered not a word,
  While the first whiteness into wings unfolded;
  But, when he clearly recognized the pilot,
He cried aloud: "Quick, quick, and bow the knee!
  Behold the Angel of God! fold up thy hands!
  Henceforward shalt thou see such officers!
See, how he scorns all human arguments,
  So that no oar he wants, nor other sail
  Than his own wings, between so distant shores!
See, how he holds them, pointed straight to heaven,
  Fanning the air with the eternal pinions,
  That do not moult themselves like mortal hair!"
And then, as nearer and more near us came
  The Bird of Heaven, more glorious he appeared,
  So that the eye could not sustain his presence,
But down I cast it; and he came to shore
  With a small vessel, gliding swift and light,
  So that the water swallowed naught thereof.
Upon the stern stood the Celestial Pilot!
  Beatitude seemed written in his face!
  And more than a hundred spirits sat within.
"In exitu Israel de Aegypto!"
  Thus sang they all together in one voice,
  With whatso in that Psalm is after written.
Then made he sign of holy rood upon them,
  Whereat all cast themselves upon the shore,
  And he departed swiftly as he came.


THE TERRESTRIAL PARADISE

PURGATORIO XXVIII. 1-33.

Longing already to search in and round
  The heavenly forest, dense and living-green,
  Which tempered to the eyes the newborn day,
Withouten more delay I left the bank,
  Crossing the level country slowly, slowly,
  Over the soil, that everywhere breathed fragrance.
A gently-breathing air, that no mutation
  Had in itself, smote me upon the forehead,
  No heavier blow, than of a pleasant breeze,
Whereat the tremulous branches readily
  Did all of them bow downward towards that side
  Where its first shadow casts the Holy Mountain;
Yet not from their upright direction bent
  So that the little birds upon their tops
  Should cease the practice of their tuneful art;
But with full-throated joy, the hours of prime
  Singing received they in the midst of foliage
  That made monotonous burden to their rhymes,
Even as from branch to branch it gathering swells,
  Through the pine forests on the shore of Chiassi,
  When Aeolus unlooses the Sirocco.
Already my slow steps had led me on
  Into the ancient wood so far, that I
  Could see no more the place where I had entered.
And lo! my further course cut off a river,
  Which, tow'rds the left hand, with its little waves,
  Bent down the grass, that on its margin sprang.
All waters that on earth most limpid are,
  Would seem to have within themselves some mixture,
  Compared with that, which nothing doth conceal,
Although it moves on with a brown, brown current,
  Under the shade perpetual, that never
  Ray of the sun lets in, nor of the moon.



BEATRICE.

PURGATORIO XXX. 13-33, 85-99, XXXI. 13-21.

Even as the Blessed, at the final summons,
  Shall rise up quickened, each one from his grave,
  Wearing again the garments of the flesh,
So, upon that celestial chariot,
  A hundred rose ad vocem tanti senis,
  Ministers and messengers of life eternal.
They all were saying, "Benedictus qui venis,"
  And scattering flowers above and round about,
  "Manibus o date lilia plenis."
Oft have I seen, at the approach of day,
  The orient sky all stained with roseate hues,
  And the other heaven with light serene adorned,
And  the sun's face uprising, overshadowed,
  So that, by temperate influence of vapors,
  The eye sustained his aspect for long while;
Thus in the bosom of a cloud of flowers,
  Which from those hands angelic were thrown up,
  And down descended inside and without,
With crown of olive o'er a snow-white veil,
  Appeared a lady, under a green mantle,
  Vested in colors of the living flame.
  .    .    .    .    .    .
Even as the snow, among the living rafters
  Upon the back of Italy, congeals,
  Blown on and beaten by Sclavonian winds,
And then, dissolving, filters through itself,
  Whene'er the land, that loses shadow, breathes,
  Like as a taper melts before a fire,
Even such I was, without a sigh or tear,
  Before the song of those who chime forever
  After the chiming of the eternal spheres;
But, when I heard in those sweet melodies
  Compassion for me, more than had they said,
  "O wherefore, lady, dost thou thus consume him?"
The ice, that was about my heart congealed,
  To air and water changed, and, in my anguish,
  Through lips and eyes came gushing from my breast.
   .    .    .    .    .    .
Confusion and dismay, together mingled,
  Forced such a feeble "Yes!" out of my mouth,
  To understand it one had need of sight.
Even as a cross-bow breaks, when 't is discharged,
   Too tensely drawn the bow-string and the bow,
  And with less force the arrow hits the mark;
So I gave way beneath this heavy burden,
  Gushing forth into bitter tears and sighs,
  And the voice, fainting, flagged upon its passage.



TO ITALY

BY VINCENZO DA FILICAJA

Italy! Italy! thou who'rt doomed to wear
  The fatal gift of beauty, and possess
  The dower funest of infinite wretchedness
  Written upon thy forehead by despair;
Ah! would that thou wert stronger, or less fair.
  That they might fear thee more, or love thee less,
  Who in the splendor of thy loveliness
  Seem wasting, yet to mortal combat dare!
Then from the Alps I should not see descending
  Such torrents of armed men, nor Gallic horde
  Drinking the wave of Po, distained with gore,
Nor should I see thee girded with a sword
  Not thine, and with the stranger's arm contending,
  Victor or vanquished, slave forever more.



SEVEN SONNETS AND A CANZONE
[The following translations are from the poems of Michael Angelo
as revised by his nephew Michael Angelo the Younger, and were
made before the publication of the original text by Guasti.]

I

THE ARTIST

Nothing the greatest artist can conceive
  That every marble block doth not confine
  Within itself; and only its design
  The hand that follows intellect can achieve.
The ill I flee, the good that I believe,
  In thee, fair lady, lofty and divine,
  Thus hidden lie; and so that death be mine
  Art, of desired success, doth me bereave.
Love is not guilty, then, nor thy fair face,
  Nor fortune, cruelty, nor great disdain,
  Of my disgrace, nor chance, nor destiny,
If in thy heart both death and love find place
  At the same time, and if my humble brain,
  Burning, can nothing draw but death from thee.

II

FIRE

Not without fire can any workman mould
  The iron to his preconceived design,
  Nor can the artist without fire refine
  And purify from all its dross the gold;
Nor can revive the phoenix, we are told,
  Except by fire.  Hence if such death be mine
  I hope to rise again with the divine,
  Whom death augments, and time cannot make old.
O sweet, sweet death!  O fortunate fire that burns
  Within me still to renovate my days,
  Though I am almost numbered with the dead!
If by its nature unto heaven returns
  This element, me, kindled in its blaze,
  Will it bear upward when my life is fled.


III

YOUTH AND AGE

Oh give me back the days when loose and free
  To my blind passion were the curb and rein,
  Oh give me back the angelic face again,
  With which all virtue buried seems to be!
Oh give my panting footsteps back to me,
  That are in age so slow and fraught with pain,
  And fire and moisture in the heart and brain,
  If thou wouldst have me burn and weep for thee!
If it be true thou livest alone, Amor,
  On the sweet-bitter tears of human hearts,
  In an old man thou canst not wake desire;
Souls that have almost reached the other shore
  Of a diviner love should feel the darts,
  And be as tinder to a holier fire.


IV

OLD AGE

The course of my long life hath reached at last,
  In fragile bark o'er a tempestuous sea,
  The common harbor, where must rendered be
  Account of all the actions of the past.
The impassioned phantasy, that, vague and vast,
  Made art an idol and a king to me,
  Was an illusion, and but vanity
  Were the desires that lured me and harassed.
The dreams of love, that were so sweet of yore,
  What are they now, when two deaths may be mine,--
  One sure, and one forecasting its alarms?
Painting and sculpture satisfy no more
  The soul now turning to the Love Divine,
  That oped, to embrace us, on the cross its arms.


V

TO VITTORIA COLONNA

Lady, how can it chance--yet this we see
  In long experience--that will longer last
  A living image carved from quarries vast
  Than its own maker, who dies presently?
Cause yieldeth to effect if this so be,
  And even Nature is by Art at surpassed;
  This know I, who to Art have given the past,
  But see that Time is breaking faith with me.
Perhaps on both of us long life can I
  Either in color or in stone bestow,
  By now portraying each in look and mien;
So that a thousand years after we die,
  How fair thou wast, and I how full of woe,
  And wherefore I so loved thee, may be seen.


VI

TO VITTORIA COLONNA

When the prime mover of my many sighs
  Heaven took through death from out her earthly place,
  Nature, that never made so fair a face,
  Remained ashamed, and tears were in all eyes.
O fate, unheeding my impassioned cries!
  O hopes fallacious!  O thou spirit of grace,
  Where art thou now?  Earth holds in its embrace
  Thy lovely limbs, thy holy thoughts the skies.
Vainly did cruel death attempt to stay
  The rumor of thy virtuous renown,
  That Lethe's waters could not wash away!
A thousand leaves, since he hath stricken thee down,
  Speak of thee, nor to thee could Heaven convey,
  Except through death, a refuge and a crown.



VII

DANTE

What should be said of him cannot be said;
  By too great splendor is his name attended;
  To blame is easier those who him offended,
  Than reach the faintest glory round him shed.
This man descended to the doomed and dead
  For our instruction; then to God ascended;
  Heaven opened wide to him its portals splendid,
  Who from his country's, closed against him, fled.
Ungrateful land!  To its own prejudice
  Nurse of his fortunes; and this showeth well,
  That the most perfect most of grief shall see.
Among a thousand proofs let one suffice,
  That as his exile hath no parallel,
  Ne'er walked the earth a greater man than he.



VIII

CANZONE

Ah me! ah me! when thinking of the years,
The vanished years, alas, I do not find
Among them all one day that was my own!
Fallacious hope; desires of the unknown,
Lamenting, loving, burning, and in tears
(For human passions all have stirred my mind),
Have held me, now I feel and know, confined
Both from the true and good still far away.
I perish day by day;
The sunshine fails, the shadows grow more dreary,
And I am near to fail, infirm and weary.



THE NATURE OF LOVE

BY GUIDO GUINIZELLI

To noble heart Love doth for shelter fly,
As seeks the bird the forest's leafy shade;
Love was not felt till noble heart beat high,
Nor before love the noble heart was made.
  Soon as the sun's broad flame
Was formed, so soon the clear light filled the air;
  Yet was not till he came:
So love springs up in noble breasts, and there
  Has its appointed space,
As heat in the bright flames finds its allotted place.
Kindles in noble heart the fire of love,
As hidden virtue in the precious stone:
This virtue comes not from the stars above,
Till round it the ennobling sun has shone;
  But when his powerful blaze
Has drawn forth what was vile, the stars impart
  Strange virtue in their rays;
And thus when Nature doth create the heart
  Noble and pure and high,
Like virtue from the star, love comes from woman's eye.



FROM THE PORTUGUESE

SONG

BY GIL VICENTE

If thou art sleeping, maiden,
  Awake and open thy door,
'T is the break of day, and we must away,
  O'er meadow, and mount, and moor.

Wait not to find thy slippers,
  But come with thy naked feet;
We shall have to pass through the dewy grass,
  And waters wide and fleet.



FROM EASTERN SOURCES

THE FUGITIVE

A TARTAR SONG

I

"He is gone to the desert land
I can see the shining mane
Of his horse on the distant plain,
As he rides with his Kossak band!

"Come back, rebellious one!
Let thy proud heart relent;
Come back to my tall, white tent,
Come back, my only son!

"Thy hand in freedom shall
Cast thy hawks, when morning breaks,
On the swans of the Seven Lakes,
On the lakes of Karajal.

"I will give thee leave to stray
And pasture thy hunting steeds
In the long grass and the reeds
Of the meadows of Karaday.

"I will give thee my coat of mail,
Of softest leather made,
With choicest steel inlaid;
Will not all this prevail?"


II

"This hand no longer shall
Cast my hawks, when morning breaks,
On the swans of the Seven Lakes,
On the lakes of Karajal.

"I will no longer stray
And pasture my hunting steeds
In the long grass and the reeds
Of the meadows of Karaday.

"Though thou give me thy coat of mall,
Of softest leather made,
With choicest steel inlaid,
All this cannot prevail.

"What right hast thou, O Khan,
To me, who am mine own,
Who am slave to God alone,
And not to any man?

"God will appoint the day
When I again shall be
By the blue, shallow sea,
Where the steel-bright sturgeons play.

"God, who doth care for me,
In the barren wilderness,
On unknown hills, no less
Will my companion be.

"When I wander lonely and lost
In the wind; when I watch at night
Like a hungry wolf, and am white
And covered with hoar-frost;

"Yea, wheresoever I be,
In the yellow desert sands,
In mountains or unknown lands,
Allah will care for me!"


III

Then Sobra, the old, old man,--
Three hundred and sixty years
Had he lived in this land of tears,
Bowed down and said, "O Khan!

"If you bid me, I will speak.
There's no sap in dry grass,
No marrow in dry bones!  Alas,
The mind of old men is weak!

"I am old, I am very old:
I have seen the primeval man,
I have seen the great Gengis Khan,
Arrayed in his robes of gold.

"What I say to you is the truth;
And I say to you, O Khan,
Pursue not the star-white man,
Pursue not the beautiful youth.

"Him the Almighty made,
And brought him forth of the light,
At the verge and end of the night,
When men on the mountain prayed.

"He was born at the break of day,
When abroad the angels walk;
He hath listened to their talk,
And he knoweth what they say.

"Gifted with Allah's grace,
Like the moon of Ramazan
When it shines in the skies, O Khan,
Is the light of his beautiful face.

"When first on earth he trod,
The first words that he said
Were these, as he stood and prayed,
There is no God but God!

"And he shall be king of men,
For Allah hath heard his prayer,
And the Archangel in the air,
Gabriel, hath said, Amen!"



THE SIEGE OF KAZAN

Black are the moors before Kazan,
  And their stagnant waters smell of blood:
I said in my heart, with horse and man,
  I will swim across this shallow flood.

Under the feet of Argamack,
  Like new moons were the shoes he bare,
Silken trappings hung on his back,
  In a talisman on his neck, a prayer.

My warriors, thought I, are following me;
  But when I looked behind, alas!
Not one of all the band could I see,
  All had sunk in the black morass!

Where are our shallow fords? and where
  The power of Kazan with its fourfold gates?
From the prison windows our maidens fair
  Talk of us still through the iron grates.

We cannot hear them; for horse and man
  Lie buried deep in the dark abyss!
Ah! the black day hath come down on Kazan!
  Ah! was ever a grief like this?



THE BOY AND THE BROOK

Down from yon distant mountain height
  The brooklet flows through the village street;
A boy comes forth to wash his hands,
Washing, yes washing, there he stands,
  In the water cool and sweet.

Brook, from what mountain dost thou come,
  O my brooklet cool and sweet!
I come from yon mountain high and cold,
Where lieth the new snow on the old,
  And melts in the summer heat.

Brook, to what river dost thou go?
  O my brooklet cool and sweet!
I go to the river there below
Where in bunches the violets grow,
  And sun and shadow meet.

Brook, to what garden dost thou go?
  O my brooklet cool and sweet!
I go to the garden in the vale
Where all night long the nightingale
  Her love-song doth repeat.

Brook, to what fountain dost thou go?
  O my brooklet cool and sweet!
I go to the fountain at whose brink
The maid that loves thee comes to drink,
And whenever she looks therein,
I rise to meet her, and kiss her chin,
  And my joy is then complete.



TO THE STORK

Welcome, O Stork! that dost wing
  Thy flight from the far-away!
Thou hast brought us the signs of Spring,
  Thou hast made our sad hearts gay.

Descend, O Stork! descend
  Upon our roof to rest;
In our ash-tree, O my friend,
  My darling, make thy nest.

To thee, O Stork, I complain,
  O Stork, to thee I impart
The thousand sorrows, the pain
  And aching of my heart.

When thou away didst go,
  Away from this tree of ours,
The withering winds did blow,
  And dried up all the flowers.

Dark grew the brilliant sky,
  Cloudy and dark and drear;
They were breaking the snow on high,
  And winter was drawing near.

From Varaca's rocky wall,
  From the rock of Varaca unrolled,
the snow came and covered all,
  And the green meadow was cold.

O Stork, our garden with snow
  Was hidden away and lost,
Mid the rose-trees that in it grow
  Were withered by snow and frost.



FROM THE LATIN

VIRGIL'S FIRST ECLOGUE


MELIBOEUS.
Tityrus, thou in the shade of a spreading beech-tree reclining,
Meditatest, with slender pipe, the Muse of the woodlands.
We our country's bounds and pleasant pastures relinquish,
We our country fly; thou, Tityrus, stretched in the shadow,
Teachest the woods to resound with the name of the fair Amaryllis.

TITYRUS.
O Meliboeus, a god for us this leisure created,
For he will be unto me a god forever; his altar
Oftentimes shall imbue a tender lamb from our sheepfolds.
He, my heifers to wander at large, and myself, as thou seest,
On my rustic reed to play what I will, hath permitted.

MELIBOEUS.
Truly I envy not, I marvel rather; on all sides
In all the fields is such trouble.  Behold, my goats I am driving,
Heartsick, further away; this one scarce, Tityrus, lead I;
For having here yeaned twins just now among the dense hazels,
Hope of the flock, ah me! on the naked flint she hath left them.
Often this evil to me, if my mind had not been insensate,
Oak-trees stricken by heaven predicted, as now I remember;
Often the sinister crow from the hollow ilex predicted,
Nevertheless, who this god may be, O Tityrus, tell me.

TITYRUS.
O Meliboeus, the city that they call Rome, I imagined,
Foolish I! to be like this of ours, where often we shepherds
Wonted are to drive down of our ewes the delicate offspring.
Thus whelps like unto dogs had I known, and kids to their mothers,
Thus to compare great things with small had I been accustomed.
But this among other cities its head as far hath exalted
As the cypresses do among the lissome viburnums.

MELIBOEUS.
And what so great occasion of seeing Rome hath possessed thee?

TITYRUS.
Liberty, which, though late, looked upon me in my inertness,
After the time when my beard fell whiter front me in shaving,--
Yet she looked upon me, and came to me after a long while,
Since Amaryllis possesses and Galatea hath left me.
For I will even confess that while Galatea possessed me
Neither care of my flock nor hope of liberty was there.
Though from my wattled folds there went forth many a victim,
And the unctuous cheese was pressed for the city ungrateful,
Never did my right hand return home heavy with money.

MELIBOEUS.
I have wondered why sad thou invokedst the gods, Amaryllis,
And for whom thou didst suffer the apples to hang on the branches!
Tityrus hence was absent!  Thee, Tityrus, even the pine-trees,
Thee, the very fountains, the very copses were calling.

TITYRUS.
What could I do?  No power had I to escape from my bondage,
Nor had I power elsewhere to recognize gods so propitious.
Here I beheld that youth, to whom each year, Meliboeus,
During twice six days ascends the smoke of our altars.
Here first gave he response to me soliciting favor:
"Feed as before your heifers, ye boys, and yoke up your bullocks."

MELIBOEUS.
Fortunate old man!  So then thy fields will be left thee,
And large enough for thee, though naked stone and the marish
All thy pasture-lands with the dreggy rush may encompass.
No unaccustomed food thy gravid ewes shall endanger,
Nor of the neighboring flock the dire contagion inject them.
Fortunate old man!  Here among familiar rivers,
And these sacred founts, shalt thou take the shadowy coolness.
On this side, a hedge along the neighboring cross-road,
Where Hyblaean bees ever feed on the flower of the willow,
Often with gentle susurrus to fall asleep shall persuade thee.
Yonder, beneath the high rock, the pruner shall sing to the breezes,
Nor meanwhile shalt thy heart's delight, the hoarse wood-pigeons,
Nor the turtle-dove cease to mourn from aerial elm-trees.

TITYRUS.
Therefore the agile stags shall sooner feed in the ether,
And the billows leave the fishes bare on the sea-shore.
Sooner, the border-lands of both overpassed, shall the exiled
Parthian drink of the Soane, or the German drink of the Tigris,
Than the face of him shall glide away from my bosom!

MELIBOEUS.
But we hence shall go, a part to the thirsty Afries,
Part to Scythia come, and the rapid Cretan Oaxes,
And to the Britons from all the universe utterly sundered.
Ah, shall I ever, a long time hence, the bounds of my country
And the roof of my lowly cottage covered with greensward
Seeing, with wonder behold,--my kingdoms, a handful of wheat-ears!
Shall an impious soldier possess these lands newly cultured,
And these fields of corn a barbarian?  Lo, whither discord
Us wretched people hath brought! for whom our fields we have planted!
Graft, Meliboeus, thy pear-trees now, put in order thy vine-yards.
Go, my goats, go hence, my flocks so happy aforetime.
Never again henceforth outstretched in my verdurous cavern
Shall I behold you afar from the bushy precipice hanging.
Songs no more shall I sing; not with me, ye goats, as your shepherd,
Shall ye browse on the bitter willow or blooming laburnum.

TITYRUS.
Nevertheless, this night together with me canst thou rest thee
Here on the verdant leaves; for us there are mellowing apples,
Chestnuts soft to the touch, and clouted cream in abundance;
And the high roofs now of the villages smoke in the distance,
And from the lofty mountains are falling larger the shadows.



OVID IN EXILE

AT TOMIS, IN BESSARABIA, NEAR THE MOUTHS OF THE DANUBE.


Should any one there in Rome remember Ovid the exile,
  And, without me, my name still in the city survive;

Tell him that under stars which never set in the ocean
  I am existing still, here in a barbarous land.

Fierce Sarmatians encompass me round, and the Bessi and Getae;
  Names how unworthy to be sung by a genius like mine!

Yet when the air is warm, intervening Ister defends us:
  He, as he flows, repels inroads of war with his waves.

But when the dismal winter reveals its hideous aspect,
  When all the earth becomes white with a marble-like frost;

And when Boreas is loosed, and the snow hurled under Arcturus,
  Then these nations, in sooth, shudder and shiver with cold.

Deep lies the snow, and neither the sun nor the rain can dissolve it;
  Boreas hardens it still, makes it forever remain.

Hence, ere the first ha-s melted away, another succeeds it,
 And two years it is wont, in many places, to lie.

And so great is the power of the Northwind awakened, it levels
  Lofty towers with the ground, roofs uplifted bears off.

Wrapped in skins, and with trousers sewed, they contend with the weather,
  And their faces alone of the whole body are seen.

Often their tresses, when shaken, with pendent icicles tinkle,
  And their whitened beards shine with the gathering frost.

Wines consolidate stand, preserving the form of the vessels;
  No more draughts of wine,--pieces presented they drink.

Why should I tell you how all the rivers are frozen and solid,
  And from out of the lake frangible water is dug?

Ister,--no narrower stream than the river that bears the papyrus,--
  Which through its many mouths mingles its waves with the deep;

Ister, with hardening winds, congeals its cerulean waters,
  Under a roof of ice, winding its way to the sea.

There where ships have sailed, men go on foot; and the billows,
  Solid made by the frost, hoof-beats of horses indent.

Over unwonted bridges, with water gliding beneath them,
  The Sarmatian steers drag their barbarian carts.

Scarcely shall I be believed; yet when naught is gained by a falsehood,
  Absolute credence then should to a witness be given.

I have beheld the vast Black Sea of ice all compacted,
  And a slippery crust pressing its motionless tides.

'T is not enough to have seen, I have trodden this indurate ocean;
  Dry shod passed my foot over its uppermost wave.

If thou hadst had of old such a sea as this is, Leander!
  Then thy death had not been charged as a crime to the Strait.

Nor can the curved dolphins uplift themselves from the water;
  All their struggles to rise merciless winter prevents;

And though Boreas sound with roar of wings in commotion,
  In the blockaded gulf never a wave will there be;

And the ships will stand hemmed in by the frost, as in marble,
  Nor will the oar have power through the stiff waters to cleave.

Fast-bound in the ice have I seen the fishes adhering,
  Yet notwithstanding this some of them still were alive.

Hence, if the savage strength of omnipotent Boreas freezes
  Whether the salt-sea wave, whether the refluent stream,--

Straightway,--the Ister made level by arid blasts of the North-wind,--
  Comes the barbaric foe borne on his swift-footed steed;

Foe, that powerful made by his steed and his far-flying arrows,
  All the neighboring land void of inhabitants makes.

Some take flight, and none being left to defend their possessions,
  Unprotected, their goods pillage and plunder become;

Cattle and creaking carts, the little wealth of the country,
  And what riches beside indigent peasants possess.

Some as captives are driven along, their hands bound behind them,
  Looking backward in vain toward their Lares and lands.

Others, transfixed with barbed arrows, in agony perish,
  For the swift arrow-heads all have in poison been dipped.

What they cannot carry or lead away they demolish,
  And the hostile flames burn up the innocent cots.

Even when there is peace, the fear of war is impending;
  None, with the ploughshare pressed, furrows the soil any more.

Either this region sees, or fears a foe that it sees not,
  And the sluggish land slumbers in utter neglect.

No sweet grape lies hidden here in the shade of its vine-leaves,
  No fermenting must fills and o'erflows the deep vats.

Apples the region denies; nor would Acontius have found here
  Aught upon which to write words for his mistress to read.

Naked and barren plains without leaves or trees we behold here,--
  Places, alas! unto which no happy man would repair.

Since then this mighty orb lies open so wide upon all sides,
  Has this region been found only my prison to be?


Now the zephyrs diminish the cold, and the year being ended,
  Winter Maeotian seems longer than ever before;

And the Ram that bore unsafely the burden of Helle,
  Now makes the hours of the day equal with those of the night.

Now the boys and the laughing girls the violet gather,
  Which the fields bring forth, nobody sowing the seed.

Now the meadows are blooming with flowers of various colors,
  And with untaught throats carol the garrulous birds.

Now the swallow, to shun the crime of her merciless mother,
  Under the rafters builds cradles and dear little homes;

And the blade that lay hid, covered up in the furrows of Ceres,
  Now from the tepid ground raises its delicate head.

Where there is ever a vine, the bud shoots forth from the tendrils,
  But from the Getic shore distant afar is the vine!

Where there is ever a tree, on the tree the branches are swelling,
  But from the Getic land distant afar is the tree!

Now it is holiday there in Rome, and to games in due order
  Give place the windy wars of the vociferous bar.

Now they are riding the horses; with light arms now they are playing,
  Now with the ball, and now round rolls the swift-flying hoop:

Now, when the young athlete with flowing oil is anointed,
  He in the Virgin's Fount bathes, over-wearied, his limbs.

Thrives the stage; and applause, with voices at variance, thunders,
  And the Theatres three for the three Forums resound.

Four times happy is he, and times without number is happy,
  Who the city of Rome, uninterdicted, enjoys.

But all I see is the snow in the vernal sunshine dissolving,
  And the waters no more delved from the indurate lake.

Nor is the sea now frozen, nor as before o'er the Ister
  Comes the Sarmatian boor driving his stridulous cart.

Hitherward, nevertheless, some keels already are steering,
  And on this Pontic shore alien vessels will be.

Eagerly shall I run to the sailor, and, having saluted,
  Who he may be, I shall ask; wherefore and whence he hath come.

Strange indeed will it be, if he come not from regions adjacent,
  And incautious unless ploughing the neighboring sea.

Rarely a mariner over the deep from Italy passes,
  Rarely he comes to these shores, wholly of harbors devoid.

Whether he knoweth Greek, or whether in Latin he speaketh,
  Surely on this account he the more welcome will be.

Also perchance from the mouth of the Strait and the waters Propontic,
  Unto the steady South-wind, some one is spreading his sails.

Whosoever he is, the news he can faithfully tell me,
  Which may become a part and an approach to the truth.

He, I pray, may be able to tell me the triumphs of Caesar,
  Which he has heard of, and vows paid to the Latian Jove;

And that thy sorrowful head, Germania, thou, the rebellious,
  Under the feet, at last, of the Great Captain hast laid.

Whoso shall tell me these things, that not to have seen will afflict me,
  Forthwith unto my house welcomed as guest shall he be.

Woe is me!  Is the house of Ovid in Scythian lands now?
  And doth punishment now give me its place for a home?

Grant, ye gods, that Caesar make this not my house and my homestead,
  But decree it to be only the inn of my pain.
